	<p>
      Consider this unique and imposing distinction. Since the writing of human
      history began, Joan of Arc is the only person, of either sex, who has ever
      held supreme command of the military forces of a nation at the age of
      seventeen
    </p>
    <p>
      LOUIS KOSSUTH.
    </p>
    <h2>
      By The Sieur Louis De Conte
    </h2>
    <p>
      (her page and secretary)
    </p>
    <p>
      Freely translated out of the ancient French into modern English from the
      original unpublished manuscript in the National Archives of France
    </p>
    <p>
      By Jean Francois Alden
    </p>
    <p>
      Authorities examined in verification of the truthfulness of this
      narrative:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  J. E. J. QUICHERAT, Condamnation et Rehabilitation de Jeanne d’Arc.
  J. FABRE, Proces de Condamnation de Jeanne d’Arc.
  H. A. WALLON, Jeanne d’Arc.
  M. SEPET, Jeanne d’Arc.
  J. MICHELET, Jeanne d’Arc.
  BERRIAT DE SAINT-PRIX, La Famille de Jeanne d’Arc.
  La Comtesse A. DE CHABANNES, La Vierge Lorraine.
  Monseigneur RICARD, Jeanne d’Arc la Venerable.
  Lord RONALD GOWER, F.S.A., Joan of Arc. JOHN O’HAGAN, Joan of Arc.
  JANET TUCKEY, Joan of Arc the Maid.
</pre>
    <h2>
      TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE
    </h2>
    <p>
      To arrive at a just estimate of a renowned man’s character one must judge
      it by the standards of his time, not ours. Judged by the standards of one
      century, the noblest characters of an earlier one lose much of their
      luster; judged by the standards of to-day, there is probably no
      illustrious man of four or five centuries ago whose character could meet
      the test at all points. But the character of Joan of Arc is unique. It can
      be measured by the standards of all times without misgiving or
      apprehension as to the result. Judged by any of them, it is still
      flawless, it is still ideally perfect; it still occupies the loftiest
      place possible to human attainment, a loftier one than has been reached by
      any other mere mortal.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we reflect that her century was the brutalest, the wickedest, the
      rottenest in history since the darkest ages, we are lost in wonder at the
      miracle of such a product from such a soil. The contrast between her and
      her century is the contrast between day and night. She was truthful when
      lying was the common speech of men; she was honest when honesty was become
      a lost virtue; she was a keeper of promises when the keeping of a promise
      was expected of no one; she gave her great mind to great thoughts and
      great purposes when other great minds wasted themselves upon pretty
      fancies or upon poor ambitions; she was modest, and fine, and delicate
      when to be loud and coarse might be said to be universal; she was full of
      pity when a merciless cruelty was the rule; she was steadfast when
      stability was unknown, and honorable in an age which had forgotten what
      honor was; she was a rock of convictions in a time when men believed in
      nothing and scoffed at all things; she was unfailingly true to an age that
      was false to the core; she maintained her personal dignity unimpaired in
      an age of fawnings and servilities; she was of a dauntless courage when
      hope and courage had perished in the hearts of her nation; she was
      spotlessly pure in mind and body when society in the highest places was
      foul in both—she was all these things in an age when crime was the
      common business of lords and princes, and when the highest personages in
      Christendom were able to astonish even that infamous era and make it stand
      aghast at the spectacle of their atrocious lives black with unimaginable
      treacheries, butcheries, and beastialities.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was perhaps the only entirely unselfish person whose name has a place
      in profane history. No vestige or suggestion of self-seeking can be found
      in any word or deed of hers. When she had rescued her King from his
      vagabondage, and set his crown upon his head, she was offered rewards and
      honors, but she refused them all, and would take nothing. All she would
      take for herself—if the King would grant it—was leave to go
      back to her village home, and tend her sheep again, and feel her mother’s
      arms about her, and be her housemaid and helper. The selfishness of this
      unspoiled general of victorious armies, companion of princes, and idol of
      an applauding and grateful nation, reached but that far and no farther.
    </p>
    <p>
      The work wrought by Joan of Arc may fairly be regarded as ranking any
      recorded in history, when one considers the conditions under which it was
      undertaken, the obstacles in the way, and the means at her disposal.
      Caesar carried conquests far, but he did it with the trained and confident
      veterans of Rome, and was a trained soldier himself; and Napoleon swept
      away the disciplined armies of Europe, but he also was a trained soldier,
      and he began his work with patriot battalions inflamed and inspired by the
      miracle-working new breath of Liberty breathed upon them by the Revolution—eager
      young apprentices to the splendid trade of war, not old and broken
      men-at-arms, despairing survivors of an age-long accumulation of
      monotonous defeats; but Joan of Arc, a mere child in years, ignorant,
      unlettered, a poor village girl unknown and without influence, found a
      great nation lying in chains, helpless and hopeless under an alien
      domination, its treasury bankrupt, its soldiers disheartened and
      dispersed, all spirit torpid, all courage dead in the hearts of the people
      through long years of foreign and domestic outrage and oppression, their
      King cowed, resigned to its fate, and preparing to fly the country; and
      she laid her hand upon this nation, this corpse, and it rose and followed
      her. She led it from victory to victory, she turned back the tide of the
      Hundred Years’ War, she fatally crippled the English power, and died with
      the earned title of DELIVERER OF FRANCE, which she bears to this day.
    </p>
    <p>
      And for all reward, the French King, whom she had crowned, stood supine
      and indifferent, while French priests took the noble child, the most
      innocent, the most lovely, the most adorable the ages have produced, and
      burned her alive at the stake.
    </p>
    <h2>
      A PECULIARITY OF JOAN OF ARC’S HISTORY
    </h2>
    <p>
      The details of the life of Joan of Arc form a biography which is unique
      among the world’s biographies in one respect: It is the only story of a
      human life which comes to us under oath, the only one which comes to us
      from the witness-stand. The official records of the Great Trial of 1431,
      and of the Process of Rehabilitation of a quarter of a century later, are
      still preserved in the National Archives of France, and they furnish with
      remarkable fullness the facts of her life. The history of no other life of
      that remote time is known with either the certainty or the
      comprehensiveness that attaches to hers.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Sieur Louis de Conte is faithful to her official history in his
      Personal Recollections, and thus far his trustworthiness is unimpeachable;
      but his mass of added particulars must depend for credit upon his word
      alone.
    </p>
    <p>
      THE TRANSLATOR.
    </p>
    <h2>
      THE SIEUR LOUIS DE CONTE
    </h2>
    <h3>
      To his Great-Great-Grand Nephews and Nieces
    </h3>
    <p>
      This is the year 1492. I am eighty-two years of age. The things I am going
      to tell you are things which I saw myself as a child and as a youth.
    </p>
    <p>
      In all the tales and songs and histories of Joan of Arc, which you and the
      rest of the world read and sing and study in the books wrought in the late
      invented art of printing, mention is made of me, the Sieur Louis de Conte—I
      was her page and secretary, I was with her from the beginning until the
      end.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was reared in the same village with her. I played with her every day,
      when we were little children together, just as you play with your mates.
      Now that we perceive how great she was, now that her name fills the whole
      world, it seems strange that what I am saying is true; for it is as if a
      perishable paltry candle should speak of the eternal sun riding in the
      heavens and say, “He was gossip and housemate to me when we were candles
      together.” And yet it is true, just as I say. I was her playmate, and I
      fought at her side in the wars; to this day I carry in my mind, fine and
      clear, the picture of that dear little figure, with breast bent to the
      flying horse’s neck, charging at the head of the armies of France, her
      hair streaming back, her silver mail plowing steadily deeper and deeper
      into the thick of the battle, sometimes nearly drowned from sight by
      tossing heads of horses, uplifted sword-arms, wind-blow plumes, and
      intercepting shields. I was with her to the end; and when that black day
      came whose accusing shadow will lie always upon the memory of the mitered
      French slaves of England who were her assassins, and upon France who stood
      idle and essayed no rescue, my hand was the last she touched in life.
    </p>
    <p>
      As the years and the decades drifted by, and the spectacle of the
      marvelous child’s meteor flight across the war firmament of France and its
      extinction in the smoke-clouds of the stake receded deeper and deeper into
      the past and grew ever more strange, and wonderful, and divine, and
      pathetic, I came to comprehend and recognize her at last for what she was—the
      most noble life that was ever born into this world save only One.
    </p>
    <h2>
      BOOK I IN DOMREMY
    </h2>
    <h3>
      Chapter 1 When Wolves Ran Free in Paris
    </h3>

    <p>
      I, THE SIEUR LOUIS DE CONTE, was born in Neufchateau, on the 6th of
      January, 1410; that is to say, exactly two years before Joan of Arc was
      born in Domremy. My family had fled to those distant regions from the
      neighborhood of Paris in the first years of the century. In politics they
      were Armagnacs—patriots; they were for our own French King, crazy
      and impotent as he was. The Burgundian party, who were for the English,
      had stripped them, and done it well. They took everything but my father’s
      small nobility, and when he reached Neufchateau he reached it in poverty
      and with a broken spirit. But the political atmosphere there was the sort
      he liked, and that was something. He came to a region of comparative
      quiet; he left behind him a region peopled with furies, madmen, devils,
      where slaughter was a daily pastime and no man’s life safe for a moment.
      In Paris, mobs roared through the streets nightly, sacking, burning,
      killing, unmolested, uninterrupted. The sun rose upon wrecked and smoking
      buildings, and upon mutilated corpses lying here, there, and yonder about
      the streets, just as they fell, and stripped naked by thieves, the unholy
      gleaners after the mob. None had the courage to gather these dead for
      burial; they were left there to rot and create plagues.
    </p>
    <p>
      And plagues they did create. Epidemics swept away the people like flies,
      and the burials were conducted secretly and by night, for public funerals
      were not allowed, lest the revelation of the magnitude of the plague’s
      work unman the people and plunge them into despair. Then came, finally,
      the bitterest winter which had visited France in five hundred years.
      Famine, pestilence, slaughter, ice, snow—Paris had all these at
      once. The dead lay in heaps about the streets, and wolves entered the city
      in daylight and devoured them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, France had fallen low—so low! For more than three quarters of a
      century the English fangs had been bedded in her flesh, and so cowed had
      her armies become by ceaseless rout and defeat that it was said and
      accepted that the mere sight of an English army was sufficient to put a
      French one to flight.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I was five years old the prodigious disaster of Agincourt fell upon
      France; and although the English King went home to enjoy his glory, he
      left the country prostrate and a prey to roving bands of Free Companions
      in the service of the Burgundian party, and one of these bands came
      raiding through Neufchateau one night, and by the light of our burning
      roof-thatch I saw all that were dear to me in this world (save an elder
      brother, your ancestor, left behind with the court) butchered while they
      begged for mercy, and heard the butchers laugh at their prayers and mimic
      their pleadings. I was overlooked, and escaped without hurt. When the
      savages were gone I crept out and cried the night away watching the
      burning houses; and I was all alone, except for the company of the dead
      and the wounded, for the rest had taken flight and hidden themselves.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was sent to Domremy, to the priest, whose housekeeper became a loving
      mother to me. The priest, in the course of time, taught me to read and
      write, and he and I were the only persons in the village who possessed
      this learning.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the time that the house of this good priest, Guillaume Fronte, became
      my home, I was six years old. We lived close by the village church, and
      the small garden of Joan’s parents was behind the church. As to that
      family there were Jacques d’Arc the father, his wife Isabel Romee; three
      sons—Jacques, ten years old, Pierre, eight, and Jean, seven; Joan,
      four, and her baby sister Catherine, about a year old. I had these
      children for playmates from the beginning. I had some other playmates
      besides—particularly four boys: Pierre Morel, Etienne Roze, Noel
      Rainguesson, and Edmond Aubrey, whose father was maire at that time; also
      two girls, about Joan’s age, who by and by became her favorites; one was
      named Haumetter, the other was called Little Mengette. These girls were
      common peasant children, like Joan herself. When they grew up, both
      married common laborers. Their estate was lowly enough, you see; yet a
      time came, many years after, when no passing stranger, howsoever great he
      might be, failed to go and pay his reverence to those two humble old women
      who had been honored in their youth by the friendship of Joan of Arc.
    </p>
    <p>
      These were all good children, just of the ordinary peasant type; not
      bright, of course—you would not expect that—but good-hearted
      and companionable, obedient to their parents and the priest; and as they
      grew up they became properly stocked with narrowness and prejudices got at
      second hand from their elders, and adopted without reserve; and without
      examination also—which goes without saying. Their religion was
      inherited, their politics the same. John Huss and his sort might find
      fault with the Church, in Domremy it disturbed nobody’s faith; and when
      the split came, when I was fourteen, and we had three Popes at once,
      nobody in Domremy was worried about how to choose among them—the
      Pope of Rome was the right one, a Pope outside of Rome was no Pope at all.
      Every human creature in the village was an Armagnac—a patriot—and
      if we children hotly hated nothing else in the world, we did certainly
      hate the English and Burgundian name and polity in that way.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 2 The Fairy Tree of Domremy
    </h3>
    <p>
      OUR DOMREMY was like any other humble little hamlet of that remote time
      and region. It was a maze of crooked, narrow lanes and alleys shaded and
      sheltered by the overhanging thatch roofs of the barnlike houses. The
      houses were dimly lighted by wooden-shuttered windows—that is, holes
      in the walls which served for windows. The floors were dirt, and there was
      very little furniture. Sheep and cattle grazing was the main industry; all
      the young folks tended flocks.
    </p>
    <p>
      The situation was beautiful. From one edge of the village a flowery plain
      extended in a wide sweep to the river—the Meuse; from the rear edge
      of the village a grassy slope rose gradually, and at the top was the great
      oak forest—a forest that was deep and gloomy and dense, and full of
      interest for us children, for many murders had been done in it by outlaws
      in old times, and in still earlier times prodigious dragons that spouted
      fire and poisonous vapors from their nostrils had their homes in there. In
      fact, one was still living in there in our own time. It was as long as a
      tree, and had a body as big around as a tierce, and scales like
      overlapping great tiles, and deep ruby eyes as large as a cavalier’s hat,
      and an anchor-fluke on its tail as big as I don’t know what, but very big,
      even unusually so for a dragon, as everybody said who knew about dragons.
      It was thought that this dragon was of a brilliant blue color, with gold
      mottlings, but no one had ever seen it, therefore this was not known to be
      so, it was only an opinion. It was not my opinion; I think there is no
      sense in forming an opinion when there is no evidence to form it on. If
      you build a person without any bones in him he may look fair enough to the
      eye, but he will be limber and cannot stand up; and I consider that
      evidence is the bones of an opinion. But I will take up this matter more
      at large at another time, and try to make the justness of my position
      appear. As to that dragon, I always held the belief that its color was
      gold and without blue, for that has always been the color of dragons. That
      this dragon lay but a little way within the wood at one time is shown by
      the fact that Pierre Morel was in there one day and smelt it, and
      recognized it by the smell. It gives one a horrid idea of how near to us
      the deadliest danger can be and we not suspect it.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the earliest times a hundred knights from many remote places in the
      earth would have gone in there one after another, to kill the dragon and
      get the reward, but in our time that method had gone out, and the priest
      had become the one that abolished dragons. Pere Guillaume Fronte did it in
      this case. He had a procession, with candles and incense and banners, and
      marched around the edge of the wood and exorcised the dragon, and it was
      never heard of again, although it was the opinion of many that the smell
      never wholly passed away. Not that any had ever smelt the smell again, for
      none had; it was only an opinion, like that other—and lacked bones,
      you see. I know that the creature was there before the exorcism, but
      whether it was there afterward or not is a thing which I cannot be so
      positive about.
    </p>
    <p>
      In a noble open space carpeted with grass on the high ground toward
      Vaucouleurs stood a most majestic beech tree with wide-reaching arms and a
      grand spread of shade, and by it a limpid spring of cold water; and on
      summer days the children went there—oh, every summer for more than
      five hundred years—went there and sang and danced around the tree
      for hours together, refreshing themselves at the spring from time to time,
      and it was most lovely and enjoyable. Also they made wreaths of flowers
      and hung them upon the tree and about the spring to please the fairies
      that lived there; for they liked that, being idle innocent little
      creatures, as all fairies are, and fond of anything delicate and pretty
      like wild flowers put together in that way. And in return for this
      attention the fairies did any friendly thing they could for the children,
      such as keeping the spring always full and clear and cold, and driving
      away serpents and insects that sting; and so there was never any
      unkindness between the fairies and the children during more than five
      hundred years—tradition said a thousand—but only the warmest
      affection and the most perfect trust and confidence; and whenever a child
      died the fairies mourned just as that child’s playmates did, and the sign
      of it was there to see; for before the dawn on the day of the funeral they
      hung a little immortelle over the place where that child was used to sit
      under the tree. I know this to be true by my own eyes; it is not hearsay.
      And the reason it was known that the fairies did it was this—that it
      was made all of black flowers of a sort not known in France anywhere.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now from time immemorial all children reared in Domremy were called the
      Children of the Tree; and they loved that name, for it carried with it a
      mystic privilege not granted to any others of the children of this world.
      Which was this: whenever one of these came to die, then beyond the vague
      and formless images drifting through his darkening mind rose soft and rich
      and fair a vision of the Tree—if all was well with his soul. That
      was what some said. Others said the vision came in two ways: once as a
      warning, one or two years in advance of death, when the soul was the
      captive of sin, and then the Tree appeared in its desolate winter aspect—then
      that soul was smitten with an awful fear. If repentance came, and purity
      of life, the vision came again, this time summer-clad and beautiful; but
      if it were otherwise with that soul the vision was withheld, and it passed
      from life knowing its doom. Still others said that the vision came but
      once, and then only to the sinless dying forlorn in distant lands and
      pitifully longing for some last dear reminder of their home. And what
      reminder of it could go to their hearts like the picture of the Tree that
      was the darling of their love and the comrade of their joys and comforter
      of their small griefs all through the divine days of their vanished youth?
    </p>
    <p>
      Now the several traditions were as I have said, some believing one and
      some another. One of them I knew to be the truth, and that was the last
      one. I do not say anything against the others; I think they were true, but
      I only know that the last one was; and it is my thought that if one keep
      to the things he knows, and not trouble about the things which he cannot
      be sure about, he will have the steadier mind for it—and there is
      profit in that. I know that when the Children of the Tree die in a far
      land, then—if they be at peace with God—they turn their
      longing eyes toward home, and there, far-shining, as through a rift in a
      cloud that curtains heaven, they see the soft picture of the Fairy Tree,
      clothed in a dream of golden light; and they see the bloomy mead sloping
      away to the river, and to their perishing nostrils is blown faint and
      sweet the fragrance of the flowers of home. And then the vision fades and
      passes—but they know, they know! and by their transfigured faces you
      know also, you who stand looking on; yes, you know the message that has
      come, and that it has come from heaven.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan and I believed alike about this matter. But Pierre Morel and Jacques
      d’Arc, and many others believed that the vision appeared twice—to a
      sinner. In fact, they and many others said they knew it. Probably because
      their fathers had known it and had told them; for one gets most things at
      second hand in this world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now one thing that does make it quite likely that there were really two
      apparitions of the Tree is this fact: From the most ancient times if one
      saw a villager of ours with his face ash-white and rigid with a ghastly
      fright, it was common for every one to whisper to his neighbor, “Ah, he is
      in sin, and has got his warning.” And the neighbor would shudder at the
      thought and whisper back, “Yes, poor soul, he has seen the Tree.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Such evidences as these have their weight; they are not to be put aside
      with a wave of the hand. A thing that is backed by the cumulative evidence
      of centuries naturally gets nearer and nearer to being proof all the time;
      and if this continue and continue, it will some day become authority—and
      authority is a bedded rock, and will abide.
    </p>
    <p>
      In my long life I have seen several cases where the tree appeared
      announcing a death which was still far away; but in none of these was the
      person in a state of sin. No; the apparition was in these cases only a
      special grace; in place of deferring the tidings of that soul’s redemption
      till the day of death, the apparition brought them long before, and with
      them peace—peace that might no more be disturbed—the eternal
      peace of God. I myself, old and broken, wait with serenity; for I have
      seen the vision of the Tree. I have seen it, and am content.
    </p>
    <p>
      Always, from the remotest times, when the children joined hands and danced
      around the Fairy Tree they sang a song which was the Tree’s song, the song
      of L’Arbre fee de Bourlemont. They sang it to a quaint sweet air—a
      solacing sweet air which has gone murmuring through my dreaming spirit all
      my life when I was weary and troubled, resting me and carrying me through
      night and distance home again. No stranger can know or feel what that song
      has been, through the drifting centuries, to exiled Children of the Tree,
      homeless and heavy of heart in countries foreign to their speech and ways.
      You will think it a simple thing, that song, and poor, perchance; but if
      you will remember what it was to us, and what it brought before our eyes
      when it floated through our memories, then you will respect it. And you
      will understand how the water wells up in our eyes and makes all things
      dim, and our voices break and we cannot sing the last lines:
    </p>
    <p>
      “And when, in Exile wand’ring, we Shall fainting yearn for glimpse of
      thee, Oh, rise upon our sight!”
     </p>
    <p>
      And you will remember that Joan of Arc sang this song with us around the
      Tree when she was a little child, and always loved it. And that hallows
      it, yes, you will grant that:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     L’ARBRE FEE DE BOURLEMONT

     SONG OF THE CHILDREN

     Now what has kept your leaves so green,
     Arbre Fee de Bourlemont?

     The children’s tears! They brought each grief,
     And you did comfort them and cheer
     Their bruised hearts, and steal a tear
     That, healed, rose a leaf.

     And what has built you up so strong,
     Arbre Fee de Bourlemont?

     The children’s love! They’ve loved you long
     Ten hundred years, in sooth,
     They’ve nourished you with praise and song,
     And warmed your heart and kept it young—
     A thousand years of youth!

     Bide always green in our young hearts,
     Arbre Fee de Bourlemont!
     And we shall always youthful be,
     Not heeding Time his flight;
     And when, in exile wand’ring, we
     Shall fainting yearn for glimpse of thee,
     Oh, rise upon our sight!
</pre>
    <p>
      The fairies were still there when we were children, but we never saw them;
      because, a hundred years before that, the priest of Domremy had held a
      religious function under the tree and denounced them as being blood-kin to
      the Fiend and barred them from redemption; and then he warned them never
      to show themselves again, nor hang any more immortelles, on pain of
      perpetual banishment from that parish.
    </p>
    <p>
      All the children pleaded for the fairies, and said they were their good
      friends and dear to them and never did them any harm, but the priest would
      not listen, and said it was sin and shame to have such friends. The
      children mourned and could not be comforted; and they made an agreement
      among themselves that they would always continue to hang flower-wreaths on
      the tree as a perpetual sign to the fairies that they were still loved and
      remembered, though lost to sight.
    </p>
    <p>
      But late one night a great misfortune befell. Edmond Aubrey’s mother
      passed by the Tree, and the fairies were stealing a dance, not thinking
      anybody was by; and they were so busy, and so intoxicated with the wild
      happiness of it, and with the bumpers of dew sharpened up with honey which
      they had been drinking, that they noticed nothing; so Dame Aubrey stood
      there astonished and admiring, and saw the little fantastic atoms holding
      hands, as many as three hundred of them, tearing around in a great ring
      half as big as an ordinary bedroom, and leaning away back and spreading
      their mouths with laughter and song, which she could hear quite
      distinctly, and kicking their legs up as much as three inches from the
      ground in perfect abandon and hilarity—oh, the very maddest and
      witchingest dance the woman ever saw.
    </p>
    <p>
      But in about a minute or two minutes the poor little ruined creatures
      discovered her. They burst out in one heartbreaking squeak of grief and
      terror and fled every which way, with their wee hazel-nut fists in their
      eyes and crying; and so disappeared.
    </p>
    <p>
      The heartless woman—no, the foolish woman; she was not heartless,
      but only thoughtless—went straight home and told the neighbors all
      about it, whilst we, the small friends of the fairies, were asleep and not
      witting the calamity that was come upon us, and all unconscious that we
      ought to be up and trying to stop these fatal tongues. In the morning
      everybody knew, and the disaster was complete, for where everybody knows a
      thing the priest knows it, of course. We all flocked to Pere Fronte,
      crying and begging—and he had to cry, too, seeing our sorrow, for he
      had a most kind and gentle nature; and he did not want to banish the
      fairies, and said so; but said he had no choice, for it had been decreed
      that if they ever revealed themselves to man again, they must go. This all
      happened at the worst time possible, for Joan of Arc was ill of a fever
      and out of her head, and what could we do who had not her gifts of
      reasoning and persuasion? We flew in a swarm to her bed and cried out,
      “Joan, wake! Wake, there is no moment to lose! Come and plead for the
      fairies—come and save them; only you can do it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      But her mind was wandering, she did not know what we said nor what we
      meant; so we went away knowing all was lost. Yes, all was lost, forever
      lost; the faithful friends of the children for five hundred years must go,
      and never come back any more.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a bitter day for us, that day that Pere Fronte held the function
      under the tree and banished the fairies. We could not wear mourning that
      any could have noticed, it would not have been allowed; so we had to be
      content with some poor small rag of black tied upon our garments where it
      made no show; but in our hearts we wore mourning, big and noble and
      occupying all the room, for our hearts were ours; they could not get at
      them to prevent that.
    </p>
    <p>
      The great tree—l’Arbre Fee de Bourlemont was its beautiful name—was
      never afterward quite as much to us as it had been before, but it was
      always dear; is dear to me yet when I go there now, once a year in my old
      age, to sit under it and bring back the lost playmates of my youth and
      group them about me and look upon their faces through my tears and break
      my heart, oh, my God! No, the place was not quite the same afterward. In
      one or two ways it could not be; for, the fairies’ protection being gone,
      the spring lost much of its freshness and coldness, and more than
      two-thirds of its volume, and the banished serpents and stinging insects
      returned, and multiplied, and became a torment and have remained so to
      this day.
    </p>
    <p>
      When that wise little child, Joan, got well, we realized how much her
      illness had cost us; for we found that we had been right in believing she
      could save the fairies. She burst into a great storm of anger, for so
      little a creature, and went straight to Pere Fronte, and stood up before
      him where he sat, and made reverence and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The fairies were to go if they showed themselves to people again, is it
      not so?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, that was it, dear.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “If a man comes prying into a person’s room at midnight when that person
      is half-naked, will you be so unjust as to say that that person is showing
      himself to that man?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Well—no.” The good priest looked a little troubled and uneasy when
      he said it.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Is a sin a sin, anyway, even if one did not intend to commit it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Pere Fronte threw up his hands and cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, my poor little child, I see all my fault,” and he drew her to his
      side and put an arm around her and tried to make his peace with her, but
      her temper was up so high that she could not get it down right away, but
      buried her head against his breast and broke out crying and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Then the fairies committed no sin, for there was no intention to commit
      one, they not knowing that any one was by; and because they were little
      creatures and could not speak for themselves and say the law was against
      the intention, not against the innocent act, because they had no friend to
      think that simple thing for them and say it, they have been sent away from
      their home forever, and it was wrong, wrong to do it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The good father hugged her yet closer to his side and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, out of the mouths of babes and sucklings the heedless and unthinking
      are condemned; would God I could bring the little creatures back, for your
      sake. And mine, yes, and mine; for I have been unjust. There, there, don’t
      cry—nobody could be sorrier than your poor old friend—don’t
      cry, dear.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But I can’t stop right away, I’ve got to. And it is no little matter,
      this thing that you have done. Is being sorry penance enough for such an
      act?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Pere Fronte turned away his face, for it would have hurt her to see him
      laugh, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, thou remorseless but most just accuser, no, it is not. I will put on
      sackcloth and ashes; there—are you satisfied?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s sobs began to diminish, and she presently looked up at the old man
      through her tears, and said, in her simple way:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, that will do—if it will clear you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Pere Fronte would have been moved to laugh again, perhaps, if he had not
      remembered in time that he had made a contract, and not a very agreeable
      one. It must be fulfilled. So he got up and went to the fireplace, Joan
      watching him with deep interest, and took a shovelful of cold ashes, and
      was going to empty them on his old gray head when a better idea came to
      him, and he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Would you mind helping me, dear?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “How, father?”
     </p>
    <p>
      He got down on his knees and bent his head low, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Take the ashes and put them on my head for me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The matter ended there, of course. The victory was with the priest. One
      can imagine how the idea of such a profanation would strike Joan or any
      other child in the village. She ran and dropped upon her knees by his side
      and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, it is dreadful. I didn’t know that that was what one meant by
      sackcloth and ashes—do please get up, father.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But I can’t until I am forgiven. Do you forgive me?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I? Oh, you have done nothing to me, father; it is yourself that must
      forgive yourself for wronging those poor things. Please get up, father,
      won’t you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But I am worse off now than I was before. I thought I was earning your
      forgiveness, but if it is my own, I can’t be lenient; it would not become
      me. Now what can I do? Find me some way out of this with your wise little
      head.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Pere would not stir, for all Joan’s pleadings. She was about to cry
      again; then she had an idea, and seized the shovel and deluged her own
      head with the ashes, stammering out through her chokings and suffocations:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There—now it is done. Oh, please get up, father.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The old man, both touched and amused, gathered her to his breast and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, you incomparable child! It’s a humble martyrdom, and not of a sort
      presentable in a picture, but the right and true spirit is in it; that I
      testify.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then he brushed the ashes out of her hair, and helped her scour her face
      and neck and properly tidy herself up. He was in fine spirits now, and
      ready for further argument, so he took his seat and drew Joan to his side
      again, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, you were used to make wreaths there at the Fairy Tree with the
      other children; is it not so?”
     </p>
    <p>
      That was the way he always started out when he was going to corner me up
      and catch me in something—just that gentle, indifferent way that
      fools a person so, and leads him into the trap, he never noticing which
      way he is traveling until he is in and the door shut on him. He enjoyed
      that. I knew he was going to drop corn along in front of Joan now. Joan
      answered:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, father.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did you hang them on the tree?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No, father.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Didn’t hang them there?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why didn’t you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I—well, I didn’t wish to.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Didn’t wish to?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No, father.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What did you do with them?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I hung them in the church.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why didn’t you want to hang them in the tree?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Because it was said that the fairies were of kin to the Fiend, and that
      it was sinful to show them honor.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did you believe it was wrong to honor them so?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. I thought it must be wrong.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then if it was wrong to honor them in that way, and if they were of kin
      to the Fiend, they could be dangerous company for you and the other
      children, couldn’t they?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I suppose so—yes, I think so.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He studied a minute, and I judged he was going to spring his trap, and he
      did. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Then the matter stands like this. They were banned creatures, of fearful
      origin; they could be dangerous company for the children. Now give me a
      rational reason, dear, if you can think of any, why you call it a wrong to
      drive them into banishment, and why you would have saved them from it. In
      a word, what loss have you suffered by it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      How stupid of him to go and throw his case away like that! I could have
      boxed his ears for vexation if he had been a boy. He was going along all
      right until he ruined everything by winding up in that foolish and fatal
      way. What had she lost by it! Was he never going to find out what kind of
      a child Joan of Arc was? Was he never going to learn that things which
      merely concerned her own gain or loss she cared nothing about? Could he
      never get the simple fact into his head that the sure way and the only way
      to rouse her up and set her on fire was to show her where some other
      person was going to suffer wrong or hurt or loss? Why, he had gone and set
      a trap for himself—that was all he had accomplished.
    </p>
    <p>
      The minute those words were out of his mouth her temper was up, the
      indignant tears rose in her eyes, and she burst out on him with an energy
      and passion which astonished him, but didn’t astonish me, for I knew he
      had fired a mine when he touched off his ill-chosen climax.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, father, how can you talk like that? Who owns France?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “God and the King.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Not Satan?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Satan, my child? This is the footstool of the Most High—Satan owns
      no handful of its soil.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then who gave those poor creatures their home? God. Who protected them in
      it all those centuries? God. Who allowed them to dance and play there all
      those centuries and found no fault with it? God. Who disapproved of God’s
      approval and put a threat upon them? A man. Who caught them again in
      harmless sports that God allowed and a man forbade, and carried out that
      threat, and drove the poor things away from the home the good God gave
      them in His mercy and His pity, and sent down His rain and dew and
      sunshine upon it five hundred years in token of His peace? It was their
      home—theirs, by the grace of God and His good heart, and no man had
      a right to rob them of it. And they were the gentlest, truest friends that
      children ever had, and did them sweet and loving service all these five
      long centuries, and never any hurt or harm; and the children loved them,
      and now they mourn for them, and there is no healing for their grief. And
      what had the children done that they should suffer this cruel stroke? The
      poor fairies could have been dangerous company for the children? Yes, but
      never had been; and could is no argument. Kinsmen of the Fiend? What of
      it? Kinsmen of the Fiend have rights, and these had; and children have
      rights, and these had; and if I had been there I would have spoken—I
      would have begged for the children and the fiends, and stayed your hand
      and saved them all. But now—oh, now, all is lost; everything is
      lost, and there is no help more!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she finished with a blast at that idea that fairy kinsmen of the
      Fiend ought to be shunned and denied human sympathy and friendship because
      salvation was barred against them. She said that for that very reason
      people ought to pity them, and do every humane and loving thing they could
      to make them forget the hard fate that had been put upon them by accident
      of birth and no fault of their own. “Poor little creatures!” she said.
      “What can a person’s heart be made of that can pity a Christian’s child
      and yet can’t pity a devil’s child, that a thousand times more needs it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      She had torn loose from Pere Fronte, and was crying, with her knuckles in
      her eyes, and stamping her small feet in a fury; and now she burst out of
      the place and was gone before we could gather our senses together out of
      this storm of words and this whirlwind of passion.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Pere had got upon his feet, toward the last, and now he stood there
      passing his hand back and forth across his forehead like a person who is
      dazed and troubled; then he turned and wandered toward the door of his
      little workroom, and as he passed through it I heard him murmur
      sorrowfully:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, me, poor children, poor fiends, they have rights, and she said true—I
      never thought of that. God forgive me, I am to blame.”
     </p>
    <p>
      When I heard that, I knew I was right in the thought that he had set a
      trap for himself. It was so, and he had walked into it, you see. I seemed
      to feel encouraged, and wondered if mayhap I might get him into one; but
      upon reflection my heart went down, for this was not my gift.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 3 All Aflame with Love of France
    </h3>

    <p>
      SPEAKING of this matter reminds me of many incidents, many things that I
      could tell, but I think I will not try to do it now. It will be more to my
      present humor to call back a little glimpse of the simple and colorless
      good times we used to have in our village homes in those peaceful days—especially
      in the winter. In the summer we children were out on the breezy uplands
      with the flocks from dawn till night, and then there was noisy frolicking
      and all that; but winter was the cozy time, winter was the snug time.
      Often we gathered in old Jacques d’Arc’s big dirt-floored apartment, with
      a great fire going, and played games, and sang songs, and told fortunes,
      and listened to the old villagers tell tales and histories and lies and
      one thing and another till twelve o’clock at night.
    </p>
    <p>
      One winter’s night we were gathered there—it was the winter that for
      years afterward they called the hard winter—and that particular
      night was a sharp one. It blew a gale outside, and the screaming of the
      wind was a stirring sound, and I think I may say it was beautiful, for I
      think it is great and fine and beautiful to hear the wind rage and storm
      and blow its clarions like that, when you are inside and comfortable. And
      we were. We had a roaring fire, and the pleasant spit-spit of the snow and
      sleet falling in it down the chimney, and the yarning and laughing and
      singing went on at a noble rate till about ten o’clock, and then we had a
      supper of hot porridge and beans, and meal cakes with butter, and
      appetites to match.
    </p>
    <p>
      Little Joan sat on a box apart, and had her bowl and bread on another one,
      and her pets around her helping. She had more than was usual of them or
      economical, because all the outcast cats came and took up with her, and
      homeless or unlovable animals of other kinds heard about it and came, and
      these spread the matter to the other creatures, and they came also; and as
      the birds and the other timid wild things of the woods were not afraid of
      her, but always had an idea she was a friend when they came across her,
      and generally struck up an acquaintance with her to get invited to the
      house, she always had samples of those breeds in stock. She was hospitable
      to them all, for an animal was an animal to her, and dear by mere reason
      of being an animal, no matter about its sort or social station; and as she
      would allow of no cages, no collars, no fetters, but left the creatures
      free to come and go as they liked, that contented them, and they came; but
      they didn’t go, to any extent, and so they were a marvelous nuisance, and
      made Jacques d’Arc swear a good deal; but his wife said God gave the child
      the instinct, and knew what He was doing when He did it, therefore it must
      have its course; it would be no sound prudence to meddle with His affairs
      when no invitation had been extended. So the pets were left in peace, and
      here they were, as I have said, rabbits, birds, squirrels, cats, and other
      reptiles, all around the child, and full of interest in her supper, and
      helping what they could. There was a very small squirrel on her shoulder,
      sitting up, as those creatures do, and turning a rocky fragment of
      prehistoric chestnut-cake over and over in its knotty hands, and hunting
      for the less indurated places, and giving its elevated bushy tail a flirt
      and its pointed ears a toss when it found one—signifying
      thankfulness and surprise—and then it filed that place off with
      those two slender front teeth which a squirrel carries for that purpose
      and not for ornament, for ornamental they never could be, as any will
      admit that have noticed them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Everything was going fine and breezy and hilarious, but then there came an
      interruption, for somebody hammered on the door. It was one of those
      ragged road-stragglers—the eternal wars kept the country full of
      them. He came in, all over snow, and stamped his feet, and shook, and
      brushed himself, and shut the door, and took off his limp ruin of a hat,
      and slapped it once or twice against his leg to knock off its fleece of
      snow, and then glanced around on the company with a pleased look upon his
      thin face, and a most yearning and famished one in his eye when it fell
      upon the victuals, and then he gave us a humble and conciliatory
      salutation, and said it was a blessed thing to have a fire like that on
      such a night, and a roof overhead like this, and that rich food to eat,
      and loving friends to talk with—ah, yes, this was true, and God help
      the homeless, and such as must trudge the roads in this weather.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nobody said anything. The embarrassed poor creature stood there and
      appealed to one face after the other with his eyes, and found no welcome
      in any, the smile on his own face flickering and fading and perishing,
      meanwhile; then he dropped his gaze, the muscles of his face began to
      twitch, and he put up his hand to cover this womanish sign of weakness.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Sit down!”
     </p>
    <p>
      This thunder-blast was from old Jacques d’Arc, and Joan was the object of
      it. The stranger was startled, and took his hand away, and there was Joan
      standing before him offering him her bowl of porridge. The man said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “God Almighty bless you, my darling!” and then the tears came, and ran
      down his cheeks, but he was afraid to take the bowl.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you hear me? Sit down, I say!”
     </p>
    <p>
      There could not be a child more easy to persuade than Joan, but this was
      not the way. Her father had not the art; neither could he learn it. Joan
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Father, he is hungry; I can see it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Let him work for food, then. We are being eaten out of house and home by
      his like, and I have said I would endure it no more, and will keep my
      word. He has the face of a rascal anyhow, and a villain. Sit down, I tell
      you!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I know not if he is a rascal or no, but he is hungry, father, and shall
      have my porridge—I do not need it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “If you don’t obey me I’ll—Rascals are not entitled to help from
      honest people, and no bite nor sup shall they have in this house. Joan!”
     </p>
    <p>
      She set her bowl down on the box and came over and stood before her
      scowling father, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Father, if you will not let me, then it must be as you say; but I would
      that you would think—then you would see that it is not right to
      punish one part of him for what the other part has done; for it is that
      poor stranger’s head that does the evil things, but it is not his head
      that is hungry, it is his stomach, and it has done no harm to anybody, but
      is without blame, and innocent, not having any way to do a wrong, even if
      it was minded to it. Please let—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What an idea! It is the most idiotic speech I ever heard.”
     </p>
    <p>
      But Aubrey, the maire, broke in, he being fond of an argument, and having
      a pretty gift in that regard, as all acknowledged. Rising in his place and
      leaning his knuckles upon the table and looking about him with easy
      dignity, after the manner of such as be orators, he began, smooth and
      persuasive:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I will differ with you there, gossip, and will undertake to show the
      company”—here he looked around upon us and nodded his head in a
      confident way—“that there is a grain of sense in what the child has
      said; for look you, it is of a certainty most true and demonstrable that
      it is a man’s head that is master and supreme ruler over his whole body.
      Is that granted? Will any deny it?” He glanced around again; everybody
      indicated assent. “Very well, then; that being the case, no part of the
      body is responsible for the result when it carries out an order delivered
      to it by the head; ergo, the head is alone responsible for crimes done by
      a man’s hands or feet or stomach—do you get the idea? am I right
      thus far?” Everybody said yes, and said it with enthusiasm, and some said,
      one to another, that the maire was in great form to-night and at his very
      best—which pleased the maire exceedingly and made his eyes sparkle
      with pleasure, for he overheard these things; so he went on in the same
      fertile and brilliant way. “Now, then, we will consider what the term
      responsibility means, and how it affects the case in point. Responsibility
      makes a man responsible for only those things for which he is properly
      responsible”—and he waved his spoon around in a wide sweep to
      indicate the comprehensive nature of that class of responsibilities which
      render people responsible, and several exclaimed, admiringly, “He is
      right!—he has put that whole tangled thing into a nutshell—it
      is wonderful!” After a little pause to give the interest opportunity to
      gather and grow, he went on: “Very good. Let us suppose the case of a pair
      of tongs that falls upon a man’s foot, causing a cruel hurt. Will you
      claim that the tongs are punishable for that? The question is answered; I
      see by your faces that you would call such a claim absurd. Now, why is it
      absurd? It is absurd because, there being no reasoning faculty—that
      is to say, no faculty of personal command—in a pair of tongs,
      personal responsibility for the acts of the tongs is wholly absent from
      the tongs; and, therefore, responsibility being absent, punishment cannot
      ensue. Am I right?” A hearty burst of applause was his answer. “Now, then,
      we arrive at a man’s stomach. Consider how exactly, how marvelously,
      indeed, its situation corresponds to that of a pair of tongs. Listen—and
      take careful note, I beg you. Can a man’s stomach plan a murder? No. Can
      it plan a theft? No. Can it plan an incendiary fire? No. Now answer me—can
      a pair of tongs?” (There were admiring shouts of “No!” and “The cases are
      just exact!” and “Don’t he do it splendid!”) “Now, then, friends and
      neighbors, a stomach which cannot plan a crime cannot be a principal in
      the commission of it—that is plain, as you see. The matter is
      narrowed down by that much; we will narrow it further. Can a stomach, of
      its own motion, assist at a crime? The answer is no, because command is
      absent, the reasoning faculty is absent, volition is absent—as in
      the case of the tongs. We perceive now, do we not, that the stomach is
      totally irresponsible for crimes committed, either in whole or in part, by
      it?” He got a rousing cheer for response. “Then what do we arrive at as
      our verdict? Clearly this: that there is no such thing in this world as a
      guilty stomach; that in the body of the veriest rascal resides a pure and
      innocent stomach; that, whatever it’s owner may do, it at least should be
      sacred in our eyes; and that while God gives us minds to think just and
      charitable and honorable thoughts, it should be, and is, our privilege, as
      well as our duty, not only to feed the hungry stomach that resides in a
      rascal, having pity for its sorrow and its need, but to do it gladly,
      gratefully, in recognition of its sturdy and loyal maintenance of its
      purity and innocence in the midst of temptation and in company so
      repugnant to its better feelings. I am done.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Well, you never saw such an effect! They rose—the whole house rose—an
      clapped, and cheered, and praised him to the skies; and one after another,
      still clapping and shouting, they crowded forward, some with moisture in
      their eyes, and wrung his hands, and said such glorious things to him that
      he was clear overcome with pride and happiness, and couldn’t say a word,
      for his voice would have broken, sure. It was splendid to see; and
      everybody said he had never come up to that speech in his life before, and
      never could do it again. Eloquence is a power, there is no question of
      that. Even old Jacques d’Arc was carried away, for once in his life, and
      shouted out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It’s all right, Joan—give him the porridge!”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was embarrassed, and did not seem to know what to say, and so didn’t
      say anything. It was because she had given the man the porridge long ago
      and he had already eaten it all up. When she was asked why she had not
      waited until a decision was arrived at, she said the man’s stomach was
      very hungry, and it would not have been wise to wait, since she could not
      tell what the decision would be. Now that was a good and thoughtful idea
      for a child.
    </p>
    <p>
      The man was not a rascal at all. He was a very good fellow, only he was
      out of luck, and surely that was no crime at that time in France. Now that
      his stomach was proved to be innocent, it was allowed to make itself at
      home; and as soon as it was well filled and needed nothing more, the man
      unwound his tongue and turned it loose, and it was really a noble one to
      go. He had been in the wars for years, and the things he told and the way
      he told them fired everybody’s patriotism away up high, and set all hearts
      to thumping and all pulses to leaping; then, before anybody rightly knew
      how the change was made, he was leading us a sublime march through the
      ancient glories of France, and in fancy we saw the titanic forms of the
      twelve paladins rise out of the mists of the past and face their fate; we
      heard the tread of the innumerable hosts sweeping down to shut them in; we
      saw this human tide flow and ebb, ebb and flow, and waste away before that
      little band of heroes; we saw each detail pass before us of that most
      stupendous, most disastrous, yet most adored and glorious day in French
      legendary history; here and there and yonder, across that vast field of
      the dead and dying, we saw this and that and the other paladin dealing his
      prodigious blows with weary arm and failing strength, and one by one we
      saw them fall, till only one remained—he that was without peer, he
      whose name gives name to the Song of Songs, the song which no Frenchman
      can hear and keep his feelings down and his pride of country cool; then,
      grandest and pitifulest scene of all, we saw his own pathetic death; and
      our stillness, as we sat with parted lips and breathless, hanging upon
      this man’s words, gave us a sense of the awful stillness that reigned in
      that field of slaughter when that last surviving soul had passed.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now, in this solemn hush, the stranger gave Joan a pat or two on the
      head and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Little maid—whom God keep!—you have brought me from death to
      life this night; now listen: here is your reward,” and at that supreme
      time for such a heart-melting, soul-rousing surprise, without another word
      he lifted up the most noble and pathetic voice that was ever heard, and
      began to pour out the great Song of Roland!
    </p>
    <p>
      Think of that, with a French audience all stirred up and ready. Oh, where
      was your spoken eloquence now! what was it to this! How fine he looked,
      how stately, how inspired, as he stood there with that mighty chant
      welling from his lips and his heart, his whole body transfigured, and his
      rags along with it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Everybody rose and stood while he sang, and their faces glowed and their
      eyes burned; and the tears came and flowed down their cheeks and their
      forms began to sway unconsciously to the swing of the song, and their
      bosoms to heave and pant; and moanings broke out, and deep ejaculations;
      and when the last verse was reached, and Roland lay dying, all alone, with
      his face to the field and to his slain, lying there in heaps and winrows,
      and took off and held up his gauntlet to God with his failing hand, and
      breathed his beautiful prayer with his paling pips, all burst out in sobs
      and wailings. But when the final great note died out and the song was
      done, they all flung themselves in a body at the singer, stark mad with
      love of him and love of France and pride in her great deeds and old
      renown, and smothered him with their embracings; but Joan was there first,
      hugged close to his breast, and covering his face with idolatrous kisses.
    </p>
    <p>
      The storm raged on outside, but that was no matter; this was the
      stranger’s home now, for as long as he might please.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 4 Joan Tames the Mad Man
    </h3>
    <p>
      ALL CHILDREN have nicknames, and we had ours. We got one apiece early, and
      they stuck to us; but Joan was richer in this matter, for, as time went
      on, she earned a second, and then a third, and so on, and we gave them to
      her. First and last she had as many as half a dozen. Several of these she
      never lost. Peasant-girls are bashful naturally; but she surpassed the
      rule so far, and colored so easily, and was so easily embarrassed in the
      presence of strangers, that we nicknamed her the Bashful. We were all
      patriots, but she was called the Patriot, because our warmest feeling for
      our country was cold beside hers. Also she was called the Beautiful; and
      this was not merely because of the extraordinary beauty of her face and
      form, but because of the loveliness of her character. These names she
      kept, and one other—the Brave.
    </p>
    <p>
      We grew along up, in that plodding and peaceful region, and got to be
      good-sized boys and girls—big enough, in fact, to begin to know as
      much about the wars raging perpetually to the west and north of us as our
      elders, and also to feel as stirred up over the occasional news from these
      red fields as they did. I remember certain of these days very clearly. One
      Tuesday a crowd of us were romping and singing around the Fairy Tree, and
      hanging garlands on it in memory of our lost little fairy friends, when
      Little Mengette cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Look! What is that?”
     </p>
    <p>
      When one exclaims like that in a way that shows astonishment and
      apprehension, he gets attention. All the panting breasts and flushed faces
      flocked together, and all the eager eyes were turned in one direction—down
      the slope, toward the village.
    </p>
    <p>
      “It’s a black flag.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “A black flag! No—is it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You can see for yourself that it is nothing else.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is a black flag, sure! Now, has any ever seen the like of that
      before?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What can it mean?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Mean? It means something dreadful—what else?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is nothing to the point; anybody knows that without the telling. But
      what?—that is the question.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is a chance that he that bears it can answer as well as any that are
      here, if you contain yourself till he comes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He runs well. Who is it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Some named one, some another; but presently all saw that it was Etienne
      Roze, called the Sunflower, because he had yellow hair and a round
      pock-marked face. His ancestors had been Germans some centuries ago. He
      came straining up the slope, now and then projecting his flag-stick aloft
      and giving his black symbol of woe a wave in the air, whilst all eyes
      watched him, all tongues discussed him, and every heart beat faster and
      faster with impatience to know his news. At last he sprang among us, and
      struck his flag-stick into the ground, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There! Stand there and represent France while I get my breath. She needs
      no other flag now.”
     </p>
    <p>
      All the giddy chatter stopped. It was as if one had announced a death. In
      that chilly hush there was no sound audible but the panting of the
      breath-blown boy. When he was presently able to speak, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Black news is come. A treaty has been made at Troyes between France and
      the English and Burgundians. By it France is betrayed and delivered over,
      tied hand and foot, to the enemy. It is the work of the Duke of Burgundy
      and that she-devil, the Queen of France. It marries Henry of England to
      Catharine of France—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Is not this a lie? Marries the daughter of France to the Butcher of
      Agincourt? It is not to be believed. You have not heard aright.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “If you cannot believe that, Jacques d’Arc, then you have a difficult task
      indeed before you, for worse is to come. Any child that is born of that
      marriage—if even a girl—is to inherit the thrones of both
      England and France, and this double ownership is to remain with its
      posterity forever!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now that is certainly a lie, for it runs counter to our Salic law, and so
      is not legal and cannot have effect,” said Edmond Aubrey, called the
      Paladin, because of the armies he was always going to eat up some day. He
      would have said more, but he was drowned out by the clamors of the others,
      who all burst into a fury over this feature of the treaty, all talking at
      once and nobody hearing anybody, until presently Haumette persuaded them
      to be still, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is not fair to break him up so in his tale; pray let him go on. You
      find fault with his history because it seems to be lies. That were reason
      for satisfaction—that kind of lies—not discontent. Tell the
      rest, Etienne.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “There is but this to tell: Our King, Charles VI., is to reign until he
      dies, then Henry V. of England is to be Regent of France until a child of
      his shall be old enough to—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That man is to reign over us—the Butcher? It is lies! all lies!”
       cried the Paladin. “Besides, look you—what becomes of our Dauphin?
      What says the treaty about him?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Nothing. It takes away his throne and makes him an outcast.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then everybody shouted at once and said the news was a lie; and all began
      to get cheerful again, saying, “Our King would have to sign the treaty to
      make it good; and that he would not do, seeing how it serves his own son.”
     </p>
    <p>
      But the Sunflower said: “I will ask you this: Would the Queen sign a
      treaty disinheriting her son?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That viper? Certainly. Nobody is talking of her. Nobody expects better of
      her. There is no villainy she will stick at, if it feed her spite; and she
      hates her son. Her signing it is of no consequence. The King must sign.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will ask you another thing. What is the King’s condition? Mad, isn’t
      he?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, and his people love him all the more for it. It brings him near to
      them by his sufferings; and pitying him makes them love him.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You say right, Jacques d’Arc. Well, what would you of one that is mad?
      Does he know what he does? No. Does he do what others make him do? Yes.
      Now, then, I tell you he has signed the treaty.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Who made him do it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You know, without my telling. The Queen.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then there was another uproar—everybody talking at once, and all
      heaping execrations upon the Queen’s head. Finally Jacques d’Arc said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But many reports come that are not true. Nothing so shameful as this has
      ever come before, nothing that cuts so deep, nothing that has dragged
      France so low; therefore there is hope that this tale is but another idle
      rumor. Where did you get it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The color went out of his sister Joan’s face. She dreaded the answer; and
      her instinct was right.
    </p>
    <p>
      “The cure of Maxey brought it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a general gasp. We knew him, you see, for a trusty man.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did he believe it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The hearts almost stopped beating. Then came the answer:
    </p>
    <p>
      “He did. And that is not all. He said he knew it to be true.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Some of the girls began to sob; the boys were struck silent. The distress
      in Joan’s face was like that which one sees in the face of a dumb animal
      that has received a mortal hurt. The animal bears it, making no complaint;
      she bore it also, saying no word. Her brother Jacques put his hand on her
      head and caressed her hair to indicate his sympathy, and she gathered the
      hand to her lips and kissed it for thanks, not saying anything. Presently
      the reaction came, and the boys began to talk. Noel Rainguesson said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, are we never going to be men! We do grow along so slowly, and France
      never needed soldiers as she needs them now, to wipe out this black
      insult.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I hate youth!” said Pierre Morel, called the Dragon-fly because his eyes
      stuck out so. “You’ve always got to wait, and wait, and wait—and
      here are the great wars wasting away for a hundred years, and you never
      get a chance. If I could only be a soldier now!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “As for me, I’m not going to wait much longer,” said the Paladin; “and
      when I do start you’ll hear from me, I promise you that. There are some
      who, in storming a castle, prefer to be in the rear; but as for me, give
      me the front or none; I will have none in front of me but the officers.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Even the girls got the war spirit, and Marie Dupont said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I would I were a man; I would start this minute!” and looked very proud
      of herself, and glanced about for applause.
    </p>
    <p>
      “So would I,” said Cecile Letellier, sniffing the air like a war-horse
      that smells the battle; “I warrant you I would not turn back from the
      field though all England were in front of me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Pooh!” said the Paladin; “girls can brag, but that’s all they are good
      for. Let a thousand of them come face to face with a handful of soldiers
      once, if you want to see what running is like. Here’s little Joan—next
      she’ll be threatening to go for a soldier!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The idea was so funny, and got such a good laugh, that the Paladin gave it
      another trial, and said: “Why you can just see her!—see her plunge
      into battle like any old veteran. Yes, indeed; and not a poor shabby
      common soldier like us, but an officer—an officer, mind you, with
      armor on, and the bars of a steel helmet to blush behind and hide her
      embarrassment when she finds an army in front of her that she hasn’t been
      introduced to. An officer? Why, she’ll be a captain! A captain, I tell
      you, with a hundred men at her back—or maybe girls. Oh, no
      common-soldier business for her! And, dear me, when she starts for that
      other army, you’ll think there’s a hurricane blowing it away!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Well, he kept it up like that till he made their sides ache with laughing;
      which was quite natural, for certainly it was a very funny idea—at
      that time—I mean, the idea of that gentle little creature, that
      wouldn’t hurt a fly, and couldn’t bear the sight of blood, and was so
      girlish and shrinking in all ways, rushing into battle with a gang of
      soldiers at her back. Poor thing, she sat there confused and ashamed to be
      so laughed at; and yet at that very minute there was something about to
      happen which would change the aspect of things, and make those young
      people see that when it comes to laughing, the person that laughs last has
      the best chance. For just then a face which we all knew and all feared
      projected itself from behind the Fairy Tree, and the thought that shot
      through us all was, crazy Benoist has gotten loose from his cage, and we
      are as good as dead! This ragged and hairy and horrible creature glided
      out from behind the tree, and raised an ax as he came. We all broke and
      fled, this way and that, the girls screaming and crying. No, not all; all
      but Joan. She stood up and faced the man, and remained so. As we reached
      the wood that borders the grassy clearing and jumped into its shelter, two
      or three of us glanced back to see if Benoist was gaining on us, and that
      is what we saw—Joan standing, and the maniac gliding stealthily
      toward her with his ax lifted. The sight was sickening. We stood where we
      were, trembling and not able to move. I did not want to see the murder
      done, and yet I could not take my eyes away. Now I saw Joan step forward
      to meet the man, though I believed my eyes must be deceiving me. Then I
      saw him stop. He threatened her with his ax, as if to warn her not to come
      further, but she paid no heed, but went steadily on, until she was right
      in front of him—right under his ax. Then she stopped, and seemed to
      begin to talk with him. It made me sick, yes, giddy, and everything swam
      around me, and I could not see anything for a time—whether long or
      brief I do not know. When this passed and I looked again, Joan was walking
      by the man’s side toward the village, holding him by his hand. The ax was
      in her other hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      One by one the boys and girls crept out, and we stood there gazing,
      open-mouthed, till those two entered the village and were hid from sight.
      It was then that we named her the Brave.
    </p>
    <p>
      We left the black flag there to continue its mournful office, for we had
      other matter to think of now. We started for the village on a run, to give
      warning, and get Joan out of her peril; though for one, after seeing what
      I had seen, it seemed to me that while Joan had the ax the man’s chance
      was not the best of the two. When we arrived the danger was past, the
      madman was in custody. All the people were flocking to the little square
      in front of the church to talk and exclaim and wonder over the event, and
      it even made the town forget the black news of the treaty for two or three
      hours.
    </p>
    <p>
      All the women kept hugging and kissing Joan, and praising her, and crying,
      and the men patted her on the head and said they wished she was a man,
      they would send her to the wars and never doubt but that she would strike
      some blows that would be heard of. She had to tear herself away and go and
      hide, this glory was so trying to her diffidence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of course the people began to ask us for the particulars. I was so ashamed
      that I made an excuse to the first comer, and got privately away and went
      back to the Fairy Tree, to get relief from the embarrassment of those
      questionings. There I found Joan, but she was there to get relief from the
      embarrassment of glory. One by one the others shirked the inquirers and
      joined us in our refuge. Then we gathered around Joan, and asked her how
      she had dared to do that thing. She was very modest about it, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You make a great thing of it, but you mistake; it was not a great matter.
      It was not as if I had been a stranger to the man. I know him, and have
      known him long; and he knows me, and likes me. I have fed him through the
      bars of his cage many times; and last December, when they chopped off two
      of his fingers to remind him to stop seizing and wounding people passing
      by, I dressed his hand every day till it was well again.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is all well enough,” said Little Mengette, “but he is a madman,
      dear, and so his likings and his gratitude and friendliness go for nothing
      when his rage is up. You did a perilous thing.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Of course you did,” said the Sunflower. “Didn’t he threaten to kill you
      with the ax?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Didn’t he threaten you more than once?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Didn’t you feel afraid?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No—at least not much—very little.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why didn’t you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      She thought a moment, then said, quite simply:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I don’t know.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made everybody laugh. Then the Sunflower said it was like a lamb trying
      to think out how it had come to eat a wolf, but had to give it up.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecile Letellier asked, “Why didn’t you run when we did?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Because it was necessary to get him to his cage; else he would kill some
      one. Then he would come to the like harm himself.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It is noticeable that this remark, which implies that Joan was entirely
      forgetful of herself and her own danger, and had thought and wrought for
      the preservation of other people alone, was not challenged, or criticized,
      or commented upon by anybody there, but was taken by all as matter of
      course and true. It shows how clearly her character was defined, and how
      well it was known and established.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was silence for a time, and perhaps we were all thinking of the same
      thing—namely, what a poor figure we had cut in that adventure as
      contrasted with Joan’s performance. I tried to think up some good way of
      explaining why I had run away and left a little girl at the mercy of a
      maniac armed with an ax, but all of the explanations that offered
      themselves to me seemed so cheap and shabby that I gave the matter up and
      remained still. But others were less wise. Noel Rainguesson fidgeted
      awhile, then broke out with a remark which showed what his mind had been
      running on:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The fact is, I was taken by surprise. That is the reason. If I had had a
      moment to think, I would no more have thought of running that I would
      think of running from a baby. For, after all, what is Theophile Benoist,
      that I should seem to be afraid of him? Pooh! the idea of being afraid of
      that poor thing! I only wish he would come along now—I’d show you!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “So do I!” cried Pierre Morel. “If I wouldn’t make him climb this tree
      quicker than—well, you’d see what I would do! Taking a person by
      surprise, that way—why, I never meant to run; not in earnest, I
      mean. I never thought of running in earnest; I only wanted to have some
      fun, and when I saw Joan standing there, and him threatening her, it was
      all I could do to restrain myself from going there and just tearing the
      livers and lights out of him. I wanted to do it bad enough, and if it was
      to do over again, I would! If ever he comes fooling around me again, I’ll—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, hush!” said the Paladin, breaking in with an air of disdain; “the way
      you people talk, a person would think there’s something heroic about
      standing up and facing down that poor remnant of a man. Why, it’s nothing!
      There’s small glory to be got in facing him down, I should say. Why, I
      wouldn’t want any better fun than to face down a hundred like him. If he
      was to come along here now, I would walk up to him just as I am now—I
      wouldn’t care if he had a thousand axes—and say—”
     </p>
    <p>
      And so he went on and on, telling the brave things he would say and the
      wonders he would do; and the others put in a word from time to time,
      describing over again the gory marvels they would do if ever that madman
      ventured to cross their path again, for next time they would be ready for
      him, and would soon teach him that if he thought he could surprise them
      twice because he had surprised them once, he would find himself very
      seriously mistaken, that’s all.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so, in the end, they all got back their self-respect; yes, and even
      added somewhat to it; indeed when the sitting broke up they had a finer
      opinion of themselves than they had ever had before.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 5 Domremy Pillaged and Burned
    </h3>

    <p>
      THEY WERE peaceful and pleasant, those young and smoothly flowing days of
      ours; that is, that was the case as a rule, we being remote from the seat
      of war; but at intervals roving bands approached near enough for us to see
      the flush in the sky at night which marked where they were burning some
      farmstead or village, and we all knew, or at least felt, that some day
      they would come yet nearer, and we should have our turn. This dull dread
      lay upon our spirits like a physical weight. It was greatly augmented a
      couple of years after the Treaty of Troyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was truly a dismal year for France. One day we had been over to have
      one of our occasional pitched battles with those hated Burgundian boys of
      the village of Maxey, and had been whipped, and were arriving on our side
      of the river after dark, bruised and weary, when we heard the bell ringing
      the tocsin. We ran all the way, and when we got to the square we found it
      crowded with the excited villagers, and weirdly lighted by smoking and
      flaring torches.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the steps of the church stood a stranger, a Burgundian priest, who was
      telling the people news which made them weep, and rave, and rage, and
      curse, by turns. He said our old mad King was dead, and that now we and
      France and the crown were the property of an English baby lying in his
      cradle in London. And he urged us to give that child our allegiance, and
      be its faithful servants and well-wishers; and said we should now have a
      strong and stable government at last, and that in a little time the
      English armies would start on their last march, and it would be a brief
      one, for all that it would need to do would be to conquer what odds and
      ends of our country yet remained under that rare and almost forgotten rag,
      the banner of France.
    </p>
    <p>
      The people stormed and raged at him, and you could see dozens of them
      stretch their fists above the sea of torch-lighted faces and shake them at
      him; and it was all a wild picture, and stirring to look at; and the
      priest was a first-rate part of it, too, for he stood there in the strong
      glare and looked down on those angry people in the blandest and most
      indifferent way, so that while you wanted to burn him at the stake, you
      still admired the aggravating coolness of him. And his winding-up was the
      coolest thing of all. For he told them how, at the funeral of our old
      King, the French King-at-Arms had broken his staff of office over the
      coffin of “Charles VI. and his dynasty,” at the same time saying, in a
      loud voice, “God grant long life to Henry, King of France and England, our
      sovereign lord!” and then he asked them to join him in a hearty Amen to
      that! The people were white with wrath, and it tied their tongues for the
      moment, and they could not speak. But Joan was standing close by, and she
      looked up in his face, and said in her sober, earnest way:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I would I might see thy head struck from thy body!”—then, after a
      pause, and crossing herself—“if it were the will of God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      This is worth remembering, and I will tell you why: it is the only harsh
      speech Joan ever uttered in her life. When I shall have revealed to you
      the storms she went through, and the wrongs and persecutions, then you
      will see that it was wonderful that she said but one bitter thing while
      she lived.
    </p>
    <p>
      From the day that that dreary news came we had one scare after another,
      the marauders coming almost to our doors every now and then; so that we
      lived in ever-increasing apprehension, and yet were somehow mercifully
      spared from actual attack. But at last our turn did really come. This was
      in the spring of ‘28. The Burgundians swarmed in with a great noise, in
      the middle of a dark night, and we had to jump up and fly for our lives.
      We took the road to Neufchateau, and rushed along in the wildest disorder,
      everybody trying to get ahead, and thus the movements of all were impeded;
      but Joan had a cool head—the only cool head there—and she took
      command and brought order out of that chaos. She did her work quickly and
      with decision and despatch, and soon turned the panic flight into a quite
      steady-going march. You will grant that for so young a person, and a girl
      at that, this was a good piece of work.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was sixteen now, shapely and graceful, and of a beauty so
      extraordinary that I might allow myself any extravagance of language in
      describing it and yet have no fear of going beyond the truth. There was in
      her face a sweetness and serenity and purity that justly reflected her
      spiritual nature. She was deeply religious, and this is a thing which
      sometimes gives a melancholy cast to a person’s countenance, but it was
      not so in her case. Her religion made her inwardly content and joyous; and
      if she was troubled at times, and showed the pain of it in her face and
      bearing, it came of distress for her country; no part of it was chargeable
      to her religion.
    </p>
    <p>
      A considerable part of our village was destroyed, and when it became safe
      for us to venture back there we realized what other people had been
      suffering in all the various quarters of France for many years—yes,
      decades of years. For the first time we saw wrecked and smoke-blackened
      homes, and in the lanes and alleys carcasses of dumb creatures that had
      been slaughtered in pure wantonness—among them calves and lambs that
      had been pets of the children; and it was pity to see the children lament
      over them.
    </p>
    <p>
      And then, the taxes, the taxes! Everybody thought of that. That burden
      would fall heavy now in the commune’s crippled condition, and all faces
      grew long with the thought of it. Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Paying taxes with naught to pay them with is what the rest of France has
      been doing these many years, but we never knew the bitterness of that
      before. We shall know it now.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And so she went on talking about it and growing more and more troubled
      about it, until one could see that it was filling all her mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last we came upon a dreadful object. It was the madman—hacked and
      stabbed to death in his iron cage in the corner of the square. It was a
      bloody and dreadful sight. Hardly any of us young people had ever seen a
      man before who had lost his life by violence; so this cadaver had an awful
      fascination for us; we could not take our eyes from it. I mean, it had
      that sort of fascination for all of us but one. That one was Joan. She
      turned away in horror, and could not be persuaded to go near it again.
      There—it is a striking reminder that we are but creatures of use and
      custom; yes, and it is a reminder, too, of how harshly and unfairly fate
      deals with us sometimes. For it was so ordered that the very ones among us
      who were most fascinated with mutilated and bloody death were to live
      their lives in peace, while that other, who had a native and deep horror
      of it, must presently go forth and have it as a familiar spectacle every
      day on the field of battle.
    </p>
    <p>
      You may well believe that we had plenty of matter for talk now, since the
      raiding of our village seemed by long odds the greatest event that had
      really ever occurred in the world; for although these dull peasants may
      have thought they recognized the bigness of some of the previous
      occurrences that had filtered from the world’s history dimly into their
      minds, the truth is that they hadn’t. One biting little fact, visible to
      their eyes of flesh and felt in their own personal vitals, became at once
      more prodigious to them than the grandest remote episode in the world’s
      history which they had got at second hand and by hearsay. It amuses me now
      when I recall how our elders talked then. They fumed and fretted in a fine
      fashion.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, yes,” said old Jacques d’Arc, “things are come to a pretty pass,
      indeed! The King must be informed of this. It is time that he cease from
      idleness and dreaming, and get at his proper business.” He meant our young
      disinherited King, the hunted refugee, Charles VII.
    </p>
    <p>
      “You say well,” said the maire. “He should be informed, and that at once.
      It is an outrage that such things would be permitted. Why, we are not safe
      in our beds, and he taking his ease yonder. It shall be made known, indeed
      it shall—all France shall hear of it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      To hear them talk, one would have imagined that all the previous ten
      thousand sackings and burnings in France had been but fables, and this one
      the only fact. It is always the way; words will answer as long as it is
      only a person’s neighbor who is in trouble, but when that person gets into
      trouble himself, it is time that the King rise up and do something.
    </p>
    <p>
      The big event filled us young people with talk, too. We let it flow in a
      steady stream while we tended the flocks. We were beginning to feel pretty
      important now, for I was eighteen and the other youths were from one to
      four years older—young men, in fact. One day the Paladin was
      arrogantly criticizing the patriot generals of France and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Look at Dunois, Bastard of Orleans—call him a general! Just put me
      in his place once—never mind what I would do, it is not for me to
      say, I have no stomach for talk, my way is to act and let others do the
      talking—but just put me in his place once, that’s all! And look at
      Saintrailles—pooh! and that blustering La Hire, now what a general
      that is!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It shocked everybody to hear these great names so flippantly handled, for
      to us these renowned soldiers were almost gods. In their far-off splendor
      they rose upon our imaginations dim and huge, shadowy and awful, and it
      was a fearful thing to hear them spoken of as if they were mere men, and
      their acts open to comment and criticism. The color rose in Joan’s face,
      and she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I know not how any can be so hardy as to use such words regarding these
      sublime men, who are the very pillars of the French state, supporting it
      with their strength and preserving it at daily cost of their blood. As for
      me, I could count myself honored past all deserving if I might be allowed
      but the privilege of looking upon them once—at a distance, I mean,
      for it would not become one of my degree to approach them too near.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Paladin was disconcerted for a moment, seeing by the faces around him
      that Joan had put into words what the others felt, then he pulled his
      complacency together and fell to fault-finding again. Joan’s brother Jean
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If you don’t like what our generals do, why don’t you go to the great
      wars yourself and better their work? You are always talking about going to
      the wars, but you don’t go.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Look you,” said the Paladin, “it is easy to say that. Now I will tell you
      why I remain chafing here in a bloodless tranquillity which my reputation
      teaches you is repulsive to my nature. I do not go because I am not a
      gentleman. That is the whole reason. What can one private soldier do in a
      contest like this? Nothing. He is not permitted to rise from the ranks. If
      I were a gentleman would I remain here? Not one moment. I can save France—ah,
      you may laugh, but I know what is in me, I know what is hid under this
      peasant cap. I can save France, and I stand ready to do it, but not under
      these present conditions. If they want me, let them send for me;
      otherwise, let them take the consequences; I shall not budge but as an
      officer.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Alas, poor France—France is lost!” said Pierre d’Arc.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Since you sniff so at others, why don’t you go to the wars yourself,
      Pierre d’Arc?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, I haven’t been sent for, either. I am no more a gentleman than you.
      Yet I will go; I promise to go. I promise to go as a private under your
      orders—when you are sent for.”
     </p>
    <p>
      They all laughed, and the Dragon-fly said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “So soon? Then you need to begin to get ready; you might be called for in
      five years—who knows? Yes, in my opinion you’ll march for the wars
      in five years.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He will go sooner,” said Joan. She said it in a low voice and musingly,
      but several heard it.
    </p>
    <p>
      “How do you know that, Joan?” said the Dragon-fly, with a surprised look.
      But Jean d’Arc broke in and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I want to go myself, but as I am rather young yet, I also will wait, and
      march when the Paladin is sent for.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No,” said Joan, “he will go with Pierre.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She said it as one who talks to himself aloud without knowing it, and none
      heard it but me. I glanced at her and saw that her knitting-needles were
      idle in her hands, and that her face had a dreamy and absent look in it.
      There were fleeting movements of her lips as if she might be occasionally
      saying parts of sentences to herself. But there was no sound, for I was
      the nearest person to her and I heard nothing. But I set my ears open, for
      those two speeches had affected me uncannily, I being superstitious and
      easily troubled by any little thing of a strange and unusual sort.
    </p>
    <p>
      Noel Rainguesson said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There is one way to let France have a chance for her salvation. We’ve got
      one gentleman in the commune, at any rate. Why can’t the Scholar change
      name and condition with the Paladin? Then he can be an officer. France
      will send for him then, and he will sweep these English and Burgundian
      armies into the sea like flies.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was the Scholar. That was my nickname, because I could read and write.
      There was a chorus of approval, and the Sunflower said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “That is the very thing—it settles every difficulty. The Sieur de
      Conte will easily agree to that. Yes, he will march at the back of Captain
      Paladin and die early, covered with common-soldier glory.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He will march with Jean and Pierre, and live till these wars are
      forgotten,” Joan muttered; “and at the eleventh hour Noel and the Paladin
      will join these, but not of their own desire.” The voice was so low that I
      was not perfectly sure that these were the words, but they seemed to be.
      It makes one feel creepy to hear such things.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Come, now,” Noel continued, “it’s all arranged; there’s nothing to do but
      organize under the Paladin’s banner and go forth and rescue France. You’ll
      all join?”
     </p>
    <p>
      All said yes, except Jacques d’Arc, who said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I’ll ask you to excuse me. It is pleasant to talk war, and I am with you
      there, and I’ve always thought I should go soldiering about this time, but
      the look of our wrecked village and that carved-up and bloody madman have
      taught me that I am not made for such work and such sights. I could never
      be at home in that trade. Face swords and the big guns and death? It isn’t
      in me. No, no; count me out. And besides, I’m the eldest son, and deputy
      prop and protector of the family. Since you are going to carry Jean and
      Pierre to the wars, somebody must be left behind to take care of our Joan
      and her sister. I shall stay at home, and grow old in peace and
      tranquillity.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He will stay at home, but not grow old,” murmured Joan.
    </p>
    <p>
      The talk rattled on in the gay and careless fashion privileged to youth,
      and we got the Paladin to map out his campaigns and fight his battles and
      win his victories and extinguish the English and put our King upon his
      throne and set his crown upon his head. Then we asked him what he was
      going to answer when the King should require him to name his reward. The
      Paladin had it all arranged in his head, and brought it out promptly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “He shall give me a dukedom, name me premier peer, and make me Hereditary
      Lord High Constable of France.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And marry you to a princess—you’re not going to leave that out, are
      you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Paladin colored a trifle, and said, brusquely:
    </p>
    <p>
      “He may keep his princesses—I can marry more to my taste.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Meaning Joan, though nobody suspected it at that time. If any had, the
      Paladin would have been finely ridiculed for his vanity. There was no fit
      mate in that village for Joan of Arc. Every one would have said that.
    </p>
    <p>
      In turn, each person present was required to say what reward he would
      demand of the King if he could change places with the Paladin and do the
      wonders the Paladin was going to do. The answers were given in fun, and
      each of us tried to outdo his predecessors in the extravagance of the
      reward he would claim; but when it came to Joan’s turn, and they rallied
      her out of her dreams and asked her to testify, they had to explain to her
      what the question was, for her thought had been absent, and she had heard
      none of this latter part of our talk. She supposed they wanted a serious
      answer, and she gave it. She sat considering some moments, then she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If the Dauphin, out of his grace and nobleness, should say to me, ‘Now
      that I am rich and am come to my own again, choose and have,’ I should
      kneel and ask him to give command that our village should nevermore be
      taxed.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was so simple and out of her heart that it touched us and we did not
      laugh, but fell to thinking. We did not laugh; but there came a day when
      we remembered that speech with a mournful pride, and were glad that we had
      not laughed, perceiving then how honest her words had been, and seeing how
      faithfully she made them good when the time came, asking just that boon of
      the King and refusing to take even any least thing for herself.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 6 Joan and Archangel Michael
    </h3>
    <p>
      ALL THROUGH her childhood and up to the middle of her fourteenth year,
      Joan had been the most light-hearted creature and the merriest in the
      village, with a hop-skip-and-jump gait and a happy and catching laugh; and
      this disposition, supplemented by her warm and sympathetic nature and
      frank and winning ways, had made her everybody’s pet. She had been a hot
      patriot all this time, and sometimes the war news had sobered her spirits
      and wrung her heart and made her acquainted with tears, but always when
      these interruptions had run their course her spirits rose and she was her
      old self again.
    </p>
    <p>
      But now for a whole year and a half she had been mainly grave; not
      melancholy, but given to thought, abstraction, dreams. She was carrying
      France upon her heart, and she found the burden not light. I knew that
      this was her trouble, but others attributed her abstraction to religious
      ecstasy, for she did not share her thinkings with the village at large,
      yet gave me glimpses of them, and so I knew, better than the rest, what
      was absorbing her interest. Many a time the idea crossed my mind that she
      had a secret—a secret which she was keeping wholly to herself, as
      well from me as from the others. This idea had come to me because several
      times she had cut a sentence in two and changed the subject when
      apparently she was on the verge of a revelation of some sort. I was to
      find this secret out, but not just yet.
    </p>
    <p>
      The day after the conversation which I have been reporting we were
      together in the pastures and fell to talking about France, as usual. For
      her sake I had always talked hopefully before, but that was mere lying,
      for really there was not anything to hang a rag of hope for France upon.
      Now it was such a pain to lie to her, and cost me such shame to offer this
      treachery to one so snow-pure from lying and treachery, and even from
      suspicion of such baseness in others, as she was, that I was resolved to
      face about now and begin over again, and never insult her more with
      deception. I started on the new policy by saying—still opening up
      with a small lie, of course, for habit is habit, and not to be flung out
      of the window by any man, but coaxed downstairs a step at a time:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, I have been thinking the thing all over last night, and have
      concluded that we have been in the wrong all this time; that the case of
      France is desperate; that it has been desperate ever since Agincourt; and
      that to-day it is more than desperate, it is hopeless.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I did not look her in the face while I was saying it; it could not be
      expected of a person. To break her heart, to crush her hope with a so
      frankly brutal speech as that, without one charitable soft place in it—it
      seemed a shameful thing, and it was. But when it was out, the weight gone,
      and my conscience rising to the surface, I glanced at her face to see the
      result.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was none to see. At least none that I was expecting. There was a
      barely perceptible suggestion of wonder in her serious eyes, but that was
      all; and she said, in her simple and placid way:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The case of France hopeless? Why should you think that? Tell me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It is a most pleasant thing to find that what you thought would inflict a
      hurt upon one whom you honor, has not done it. I was relieved now, and
      could say all my say without any furtivenesses and without embarrassment.
      So I began:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Let us put sentiment and patriotic illusions aside, and look at the facts
      in the face. What do they say? They speak as plainly as the figures in a
      merchant’s account-book. One has only to add the two columns up to see
      that the French house is bankrupt, that one-half of its property is
      already in the English sheriff’s hands and the other half in nobody’s—except
      those of irresponsible raiders and robbers confessing allegiance to
      nobody. Our King is shut up with his favorites and fools in inglorious
      idleness and poverty in a narrow little patch of the kingdom—a sort
      of back lot, as one may say—and has no authority there or anywhere
      else, hasn’t a farthing to his name, nor a regiment of soldiers; he is not
      fighting, he is not intending to fight, he means to make no further
      resistance; in truth, there is but one thing that he is intending to do—give
      the whole thing up, pitch his crown into the sewer, and run away to
      Scotland. There are the facts. Are they correct?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, they are correct.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then it is as I have said: one needs but to add them together in order to
      realize what they mean.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She asked, in an ordinary, level tone:
    </p>
    <p>
      “What—that the case of France is hopeless?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Necessarily. In face of these facts, doubt of it is impossible.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “How can you say that? How can you feel like that?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “How can I? How could I think or feel in any other way, in the
      circumstances? Joan, with these fatal figures before, you, have you really
      any hope for France—really and actually?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Hope—oh, more than that! France will win her freedom and keep it.
      Do not doubt it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It seemed to me that her clear intellect must surely be clouded to-day. It
      must be so, or she would see that those figures could mean only one thing.
      Perhaps if I marshaled them again she would see. So I said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, your heart, which worships France, is beguiling your head. You are
      not perceiving the importance of these figures. Here—I want to make
      a picture of them, here on the ground with a stick. Now, this rough
      outline is France. Through its middle, east and west, I draw a river.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, the Loire.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now, then, this whole northern half of the country is in the tight grip
      of the English.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And this whole southern half is really in nobody’s hands at all—as
      our King confesses by meditating desertion and flight to a foreign land.
      England has armies here; opposition is dead; she can assume full
      possession whenever she may choose. In very truth, all France is gone,
      France is already lost, France has ceased to exist. What was France is now
      but a British province. Is this true?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Her voice was low, and just touched with emotion, but distinct:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, it is true.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Very well. Now add this clinching fact, and surely the sum is complete:
      When have French soldiers won a victory? Scotch soldiers, under the French
      flag, have won a barren fight or two a few years back, but I am speaking
      of French ones. Since eight thousand Englishmen nearly annihilated sixty
      thousand Frenchmen a dozen years ago at Agincourt, French courage has been
      paralyzed. And so it is a common saying to-day that if you confront fifty
      French soldiers with five English ones, the French will run.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is a pity, but even these things are true.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then certainly the day for hoping is past.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I believed the case would be clear to her now. I thought it could not fail
      to be clear to her, and that she would say, herself, that there was no
      longer any ground for hope. But I was mistaken; and disappointed also. She
      said, without any doubt in her tone:
    </p>
    <p>
      “France will rise again. You shall see.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Rise?—with this burden of English armies on her back!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “She will cast it off; she will trample it under foot!” This with spirit.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Without soldiers to fight with?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The drums will summon them. They will answer, and they will march.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “March to the rear, as usual?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No; to the front—ever to the front—always to the front! You
      shall see.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And the pauper King?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He will mount his throne—he will wear his crown.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Well, of a truth this makes one’s head dizzy. Why, if I could believe
      that in thirty years from now the English domination would be broken and
      the French monarch’s head find itself hooped with a real crown of
      sovereignty—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Both will have happened before two years are sped.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Indeed? and who is going to perform all these sublime impossibilities?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was a reverent low note, but it rang clear.
    </p>
    <p>
      What could have put those strange ideas in her head? This question kept
      running in my mind during two or three days. It was inevitable that I
      should think of madness. What other way was there to account for such
      things? Grieving and brooding over the woes of France had weakened that
      strong mind, and filled it with fantastic phantoms—yes, that must be
      it.
    </p>
    <p>
      But I watched her, and tested her, and it was not so. Her eye was clear
      and sane, her ways were natural, her speech direct and to the point. No,
      there was nothing the matter with her mind; it was still the soundest in
      the village and the best. She went on thinking for others, planning for
      others, sacrificing herself for others, just as always before. She went on
      ministering to her sick and to her poor, and still stood ready to give the
      wayfarer her bed and content herself with the floor. There was a secret
      somewhere, but madness was not the key to it. This was plain.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now the key did presently come into my hands, and the way that it happened
      was this. You have heard all the world talk of this matter which I am
      about to speak of, but you have not heard an eyewitness talk of it before.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was coming from over the ridge, one day—it was the 15th of May,
      ‘28—and when I got to the edge of the oak forest and was about to
      step out of it upon the turfy open space in which the haunted beech tree
      stood, I happened to cast a glance from cover, first—then I took a
      step backward, and stood in the shelter and concealment of the foliage.
      For I had caught sight of Joan, and thought I would devise some sort of
      playful surprise for her. Think of it—that trivial conceit was
      neighbor, with but a scarcely measurable interval of time between, to an
      event destined to endure forever in histories and songs.
    </p>
    <p>
      The day was overcast, and all that grassy space wherein the Tree stood lay
      in a soft rich shadow. Joan sat on a natural seat formed by gnarled great
      roots of the Tree. Her hands lay loosely, one reposing in the other, in
      her lap. Her head was bent a little toward the ground, and her air was
      that of one who is lost to thought, steeped in dreams, and not conscious
      of herself or of the world. And now I saw a most strange thing, for I saw
      a white shadow come slowly gliding along the grass toward the Tree. It was
      of grand proportions—a robed form, with wings—and the
      whiteness of this shadow was not like any other whiteness that we know of,
      except it be the whiteness of lightnings, but even the lightnings are not
      so intense as it was, for one can look at them without hurt, whereas this
      brilliancy was so blinding that it pained my eyes and brought the water
      into them. I uncovered my head, perceiving that I was in the presence of
      something not of this world. My breath grew faint and difficult, because
      of the terror and the awe that possessed me.
    </p>
    <p>
      Another strange thing. The wood had been silent—smitten with that
      deep stillness which comes when a storm-cloud darkens a forest, and the
      wild creatures lose heart and are afraid; but now all the birds burst
      forth into song, and the joy, the rapture, the ecstasy of it was beyond
      belief; and was so eloquent and so moving, withal, that it was plain it
      was an act of worship. With the first note of those birds Joan cast
      herself upon her knees, and bent her head low and crossed her hands upon
      her breast.
    </p>
    <p>
      She had not seen the shadow yet. Had the song of the birds told her it was
      coming? It had that look to me. Then the like of this must have happened
      before. Yes, there might be no doubt of that.
    </p>
    <p>
      The shadow approached Joan slowly; the extremity of it reached her, flowed
      over her, clothed her in its awful splendor. In that immortal light her
      face, only humanly beautiful before, became divine; flooded with that
      transforming glory her mean peasant habit was become like to the raiment
      of the sun-clothed children of God as we see them thronging the terraces
      of the Throne in our dreams and imaginings.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently she rose and stood, with her head still bowed a little, and with
      her arms down and the ends of her fingers lightly laced together in front
      of her; and standing so, all drenched with that wonderful light, and yet
      apparently not knowing it, she seemed to listen—but I heard nothing.
      After a little she raised her head, and looked up as one might look up
      toward the face of a giant, and then clasped her hands and lifted them
      high, imploringly, and began to plead. I heard some of the words. I heard
      her say:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But I am so young! oh, so young to leave my mother and my home and go out
      into the strange world to undertake a thing so great! Ah, how can I talk
      with men, be comrade with men?—soldiers! It would give me over to
      insult, and rude usage, and contempt. How can I go to the great wars, and
      lead armies?—I a girl, and ignorant of such things, knowing nothing
      of arms, nor how to mount a horse, nor ride it.... Yet—if it is
      commanded—”
     </p>
    <p>
      Her voice sank a little, and was broken by sobs, and I made out no more of
      her words. Then I came to myself. I reflected that I had been intruding
      upon a mystery of God—and what might my punishment be? I was afraid,
      and went deeper into the wood. Then I carved a mark in the bark of a tree,
      saying to myself, it may be that I am dreaming and have not seen this
      vision at all. I will come again, when I know that I am awake and not
      dreaming, and see if this mark is still here; then I shall know.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 7 She Delivers the Divine Command
    </h3>

    <p>
      I HEARD my name called. It was Joan’s voice. It startled me, for how could
      she know I was there? I said to myself, it is part of the dream; it is all
      dream—voice, vision and all; the fairies have done this. So I
      crossed myself and pronounced the name of God, to break the enchantment. I
      knew I was awake now and free from the spell, for no spell can withstand
      this exorcism. Then I heard my name called again, and I stepped at once
      from under cover, and there indeed was Joan, but not looking as she had
      looked in the dream. For she was not crying now, but was looking as she
      had used to look a year and a half before, when her heart was light and
      her spirits high. Her old-time energy and fire were back, and a something
      like exaltation showed itself in her face and bearing. It was almost as if
      she had been in a trance all that time and had come awake again. Really,
      it was just as if she had been away and lost, and was come back to us at
      last; and I was so glad that I felt like running to call everybody and
      have them flock around her and give her welcome. I ran to her excited and
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, Joan, I’ve got such a wonderful thing to tell you about! You would
      never imagine it. I’ve had a dream, and in the dream I saw you right here
      where you are standing now, and—”
     </p>
    <p>
      But she put up her hand and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It was not a dream.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It gave me a shock, and I began to feel afraid again.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Not a dream?” I said, “how can you know about it, Joan?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Are you dreaming now?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I—I suppose not. I think I am not.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Indeed you are not. I know you are not. And yow were not dreaming when
      you cut the mark in the tree.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I felt myself turning cold with fright, for now I knew of a certainty that
      I had not been dreaming, but had really been in the presence of a dread
      something not of this world. Then I remembered that my sinful feet were
      upon holy ground—the ground where that celestial shadow had rested.
      I moved quickly away, smitten to the bones with fear. Joan followed, and
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do not be afraid; indeed there is no need. Come with me. We will sit by
      the spring and I will tell you all my secret.”
     </p>
    <p>
      When she was ready to begin, I checked her and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “First tell me this. You could not see me in the wood; how did you know I
      cut a mark in the tree?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Wait a little; I will soon come to that; then you will see.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But tell me one thing now; what was that awful shadow that I saw?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will tell you, but do not be disturbed; you are not in danger. It was
      the shadow of an archangel—Michael, the chief and lord of the armies
      of heaven.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I could but cross myself and tremble for having polluted that ground with
      my feet.
    </p>
    <p>
      “You were not afraid, Joan? Did you see his face—did you see his
      form?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes; I was not afraid, because this was not the first time. I was afraid
      the first time.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “When was that, Joan?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is nearly three years ago now.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “So long? Have you seen him many times?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, many times.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is this, then, that has changed you; it was this that made you
      thoughtful and not as you were before. I see it now. Why did you not tell
      us about it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It was not permitted. It is permitted now, and soon I shall tell all. But
      only you, now. It must remain a secret for a few days still.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Has none seen that white shadow before but me?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No one. It has fallen upon me before when you and others were present,
      but none could see it. To-day it has been otherwise, and I was told why;
      but it will not be visible again to any.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It was a sign to me, then—and a sign with a meaning of some kind?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, but I may not speak of that.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Strange—that that dazzling light could rest upon an object before
      one’s eyes and not be visible.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “With it comes speech, also. Several saints come, attended by myriads of
      angels, and they speak to me; I hear their voices, but others do not. They
      are very dear to me—my Voices; that is what I call them to myself.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, what do they tell you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “All manner of things—about France, I mean.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What things have they been used to tell you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      She sighed, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Disasters—only disasters, and misfortunes, and humiliation. There
      was naught else to foretell.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “They spoke of them to you beforehand?” “Yes. So that I knew what was
      going to happen before it happened. It made me grave—as you saw. It
      could not be otherwise. But always there was a word of hope, too. More
      than that: France was to be rescued, and made great and free again. But
      how and by whom—that was not told. Not until to-day.” As she said
      those last words a sudden deep glow shone in her eyes, which I was to see
      there many times in after-days when the bugles sounded the charge and
      learn to call it the battle-light. Her breast heaved, and the color rose
      in her face. “But to-day I know. God has chosen the meanest of His
      creatures for this work; and by His command, and in His protection, and by
      His strength, not mine, I am to lead His armies, and win back France, and
      set the crown upon the head of His servant that is Dauphin and shall be
      King.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was amazed, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You, Joan? You, a child, lead armies?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. For one little moment or two the thought crushed me; for it is as
      you say—I am only a child; a child and ignorant—ignorant of
      everything that pertains to war, and not fitted for the rough life of
      camps and the companionship of soldiers. But those weak moments passed;
      they will not come again. I am enlisted, I will not turn back, God helping
      me, till the English grip is loosed from the throat of France. My Voices
      have never told me lies, they have not lied to-day. They say I am to go to
      Robert de Baudricourt, governor of Vaucouleurs, and he will give me
      men-at-arms for escort and send me to the King. A year from now a blow
      will be struck which will be the beginning of the end, and the end will
      follow swiftly.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Where will it be struck?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “My Voices have not said; nor what will happen this present year, before
      it is struck. It is appointed me to strike it, that is all I know; and
      follow it with others, sharp and swift, undoing in ten weeks England’s
      long years of costly labor, and setting the crown upon the Dauphin’s head—for
      such is God’s will; my Voices have said it, and shall I doubt it? No; it
      will be as they have said, for they say only that which is true.”
     </p>
    <p>
      These were tremendous sayings. They were impossibilities to my reason, but
      to my heart they rang true; and so, while my reason doubted, my heart
      believed—believed, and held fast to the belief from that day.
      Presently I said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, I believe the things which you have said, and now I am glad that I
      am to march with you to the great wars—that is, if it is with you I
      am to march when I go.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked surprised, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is true that you will be with me when I go to the wars, but how did
      you know?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I shall march with you, and so also will Jean and Pierre, but not
      Jacques.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “All true—it is so ordered, as was revealed to me lately, but I did
      not know until to-day that the marching would be with me, or that I should
      march at all. How did you know these things?”
     </p>
    <p>
      I told her when it was that she had said them. But she did not remember
      about it. So then I knew that she had been asleep, or in a trance or an
      ecstasy of some kind, at that time. She bade me keep these and the other
      revelations to myself for the present, and I said I would, and kept the
      faith I promised.
    </p>
    <p>
      None who met Joan that day failed to notice the change that had come over
      her. She moved and spoke with energy and decision; there was a strange new
      fire in her eye, and also a something wholly new and remarkable in her
      carriage and in the set of her head. This new light in the eye and this
      new bearing were born of the authority and leadership which had this day
      been vested in her by the decree of God, and they asserted that authority
      as plainly as speech could have done it, yet without ostentation or
      bravado. This calm consciousness of command, and calm unconscious outward
      expression of it, remained with her thenceforth until her mission was
      accomplished.
    </p>
    <p>
      Like the other villagers, she had always accorded me the deference due my
      rank; but now, without word said on either side, she and I changed places;
      she gave orders, not suggestions. I received them with the deference due a
      superior, and obeyed them without comment. In the evening she said to me:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I leave before dawn. No one will know it but you. I go to speak with the
      governor of Vaucouleurs as commanded, who will despise me and treat me
      rudely, and perhaps refuse my prayer at this time. I go first to Burey, to
      persuade my uncle Laxart to go with me, it not being meet that I go alone.
      I may need you in Vaucouleurs; for if the governor will not receive me I
      will dictate a letter to him, and so must have some one by me who knows
      the art of how to write and spell the words. You will go from here
      to-morrow in the afternoon, and remain in Vaucouleurs until I need you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I said I would obey, and she went her way. You see how clear a head she
      had, and what a just and level judgment. She did not order me to go with
      her; no, she would not subject her good name to gossiping remark. She knew
      that the governor, being a noble, would grant me, another noble, audience;
      but no, you see, she would not have that, either. A poor peasant-girl
      presenting a petition through a young nobleman—how would that look?
      She always protected her modesty from hurt; and so, for reward, she
      carried her good name unsmirched to the end. I knew what I must do now, if
      I would have her approval: go to Vaucouleurs, keep out of her sight, and
      be ready when wanted.
    </p>
    <p>
      I went the next afternoon, and took an obscure lodging; the next day I
      called at the castle and paid my respects to the governor, who invited me
      to dine with him at noon of the following day. He was an ideal soldier of
      the time; tall, brawny, gray-headed, rough, full of strange oaths acquired
      here and there and yonder in the wars and treasured as if they were
      decorations. He had been used to the camp all his life, and to his notion
      war was God’s best gift to man. He had his steel cuirass on, and wore
      boots that came above his knees, and was equipped with a huge sword; and
      when I looked at this martial figure, and heard the marvelous oaths, and
      guessed how little of poetry and sentiment might be looked for in this
      quarter, I hoped the little peasant-girl would not get the privilege of
      confronting this battery, but would have to content herself with the
      dictated letter.
    </p>
    <p>
      I came again to the castle the next day at noon, and was conducted to the
      great dining-hall and seated by the side of the governor at a small table
      which was raised a couple of steps higher than the general table. At the
      small table sat several other guests besides myself, and at the general
      table sat the chief officers of the garrison. At the entrance door stood a
      guard of halberdiers, in morion and breastplate.
    </p>
    <p>
      As for talk, there was but one topic, of course—the desperate
      situation of France. There was a rumor, some one said, that Salisbury was
      making preparations to march against Orleans. It raised a turmoil of
      excited conversation, and opinions fell thick and fast. Some believed he
      would march at once, others that he could not accomplish the investment
      before fall, others that the siege would be long, and bravely contested;
      but upon one thing all voices agreed: that Orleans must eventually fall,
      and with it France. With that, the prolonged discussion ended, and there
      was silence. Every man seemed to sink himself in his own thoughts, and to
      forget where he was. This sudden and profound stillness, where before had
      been so much animation, was impressive and solemn. Now came a servant and
      whispered something to the governor, who said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Would talk with me?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, your Excellency.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “H’m! A strange idea, certainly. Bring them in.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was Joan and her uncle Laxart. At the spectacle of the great people the
      courage oozed out of the poor old peasant and he stopped midway and would
      come no further, but remained there with his red nightcap crushed in his
      hands and bowing humbly here, there, and everywhere, stupefied with
      embarrassment and fear. But Joan came steadily forward, erect and
      self-possessed, and stood before the governor. She recognized me, but in
      no way indicated it. There was a buzz of admiration, even the governor
      contributing to it, for I heard him mutter, “By God’s grace, it is a
      beautiful creature!” He inspected her critically a moment or two, then
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Well, what is your errand, my child?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “My message is to you, Robert de Baudricourt, governor of Vaucouleurs, and
      it is this: that you will send and tell the Dauphin to wait and not give
      battle to his enemies, for God will presently send him help.”
     </p>
    <p>
      This strange speech amazed the company, and many murmured, “The poor young
      thing is demented.” The governor scowled, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “What nonsense is this? The King—or the Dauphin, as you call him—needs
      no message of that sort. He will wait, give yourself no uneasiness as to
      that. What further do you desire to say to me?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “This. To beg that you will give me an escort of men-at-arms and send me
      to the Dauphin.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What for?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That he may make me his general, for it is appointed that I shall drive
      the English out of France, and set the crown upon his head.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What—you? Why, you are but a child!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yet am I appointed to do it, nevertheless.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Indeed! And when will all this happen?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Next year he will be crowned, and after that will remain master of
      France.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a great and general burst of laughter, and when it had subsided
      the governor said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Who has sent you with these extravagant messages?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “My Lord.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What Lord?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The King of Heaven.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Many murmured, “Ah, poor thing, poor thing!” and others, “Ah, her mind is
      but a wreck!” The governor hailed Laxart, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Harkye!—take this mad child home and whip her soundly. That is the
      best cure for her ailment.”
     </p>
    <p>
      As Joan was moving away she turned and said, with simplicity:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You refuse me the soldiers, I know not why, for it is my Lord that has
      commanded you. Yes, it is He that has made the command; therefore I must
      come again, and yet again; then I shall have the men-at-arms.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a great deal of wondering talk, after she was gone; and the
      guards and servants passed the talk to the town, the town passed it to the
      country; Domremy was already buzzing with it when we got back.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 8 Why the Scorners Relented
    </h3>
    <p>
      HUMAN NATURE is the same everywhere: it defies success, it has nothing but
      scorn for defeat. The village considered that Joan had disgraced it with
      her grotesque performance and its ridiculous failure; so all the tongues
      were busy with the matter, and as bilious and bitter as they were busy;
      insomuch that if the tongues had been teeth she would not have survived
      her persecutions. Those persons who did not scold did what was worse and
      harder to bear; for they ridiculed her, and mocked at her, and ceased
      neither day nor night from their witticisms and jeerings and laughter.
      Haumette and Little Mengette and I stood by her, but the storm was too
      strong for her other friends, and they avoided her, being ashamed to be
      seen with her because she was so unpopular, and because of the sting of
      the taunts that assailed them on her account. She shed tears in secret,
      but none in public. In public she carried herself with serenity, and
      showed no distress, nor any resentment—conduct which should have
      softened the feeling against her, but it did not. Her father was so
      incensed that he could not talk in measured terms about her wild project
      of going to the wars like a man. He had dreamed of her doing such a thing,
      some time before, and now he remembered that dream with apprehension and
      anger, and said that rather than see her unsex herself and go away with
      the armies, he would require her brothers to drown her; and that if they
      should refuse, he would do it with his own hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      But none of these things shook her purpose in the least. Her parents kept
      a strict watch upon her to keep her from leaving the village, but she said
      her time was not yet; that when the time to go was come she should know
      it, and then the keepers would watch in vain.
    </p>
    <p>
      The summer wasted along; and when it was seen that her purpose continued
      steadfast, the parents were glad of a chance which finally offered itself
      for bringing her projects to an end through marriage. The Paladin had the
      effrontery to pretend that she had engaged herself to him several years
      before, and now he claimed a ratification of the engagement.
    </p>
    <p>
      She said his statement was not true, and refused to marry him. She was
      cited to appear before the ecclesiastical court at Toul to answer for her
      perversity; when she declined to have counsel, and elected to conduct her
      case herself, her parents and all her ill-wishers rejoiced, and looked
      upon her as already defeated. And that was natural enough; for who would
      expect that an ignorant peasant-girl of sixteen would be otherwise than
      frightened and tongue-tied when standing for the first time in presence of
      the practised doctors of the law, and surrounded by the cold solemnities
      of a court? Yet all these people were mistaken. They flocked to Toul to
      see and enjoy this fright and embarrassment and defeat, and they had their
      trouble for their pains. She was modest, tranquil, and quite at her ease.
      She called no witnesses, saying she would content herself with examining
      the witnesses for the prosecution. When they had testified, she rose and
      reviewed their testimony in a few words, pronounced it vague, confused,
      and of no force, then she placed the Paladin again on the stand and began
      to search him. His previous testimony went rag by rag to ruin under her
      ingenious hands, until at last he stood bare, so to speak, he that had
      come so richly clothed in fraud and falsehood. His counsel began an
      argument, but the court declined to hear it, and threw out the case,
      adding a few words of grave compliment for Joan, and referring to her as
      “this marvelous child.”
     </p>
    <p>
      After this victory, with this high praise from so imposing a source added,
      the fickle village turned again, and gave Joan countenance, compliment,
      and peace. Her mother took her back to her heart, and even her father
      relented and said he was proud of her. But the time hung heavy on her
      hands, nevertheless, for the siege of Orleans was begun, the clouds
      lowered darker and darker over France, and still her Voices said wait, and
      gave her no direct commands. The winter set in, and wore tediously along;
      but at last there was a change.
    </p>
    <h2>
      BOOK II IN COURT AND CAMP
    </h2>
    <h3>
      Chapter 1 Joan Says Good-By
    </h3>
    <p>
      THE 5th of January, 1429, Joan came to me with her uncle Laxart, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The time is come. My Voices are not vague now, but clear, and they have
      told me what to do. In two months I shall be with the Dauphin.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Her spirits were high, and her bearing martial. I caught the infection and
      felt a great impulse stirring in me that was like what one feels when he
      hears the roll of the drums and the tramp of marching men.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I believe it,” I said.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I also believe it,” said Laxart. “If she had told me before, that she was
      commanded of God to rescue France, I should not have believed; I should
      have let her seek the governor by her own ways and held myself clear of
      meddling in the matter, not doubting she was mad. But I have seen her
      stand before those nobles and mighty men unafraid, and say her say; and
      she had not been able to do that but by the help of God. That I know.
      Therefore with all humbleness I am at her command, to do with me as she
      will.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “My uncle is very good to me,” Joan said. “I sent and asked him to come
      and persuade my mother to let him take me home with him to tend his wife,
      who is not well. It is arranged, and we go at dawn to-morrow. From his
      house I shall go soon to Vaucouleurs, and wait and strive until my prayer
      is granted. Who were the two cavaliers who sat to your left at the
      governor’s table that day?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “One was the Sieur Jean de Novelonpont de Metz, the other the Sieur
      Bertrand de Poulengy.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Good metal—good metal, both. I marked them for men of mine.... What
      is it I see in your face? Doubt?”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was teaching myself to speak the truth to her, not trimming it or
      polishing it; so I said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “They considered you out of your head, and said so. It is true they pitied
      you for being in such misfortune, but still they held you to be mad.”
     </p>
    <p>
      This did not seem to trouble her in any way or wound her. She only said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The wise change their minds when they perceive that they have been in
      error. These will. They will march with me. I shall see them presently..
      .. You seem to doubt again? Do you doubt?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “N-no. Not now. I was remembering that it was a year ago, and that they
      did not belong here, but only chanced to stop a day on their journey.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “They will come again. But as to matters now in hand; I came to leave with
      you some instructions. You will follow me in a few days. Order your
      affairs, for you will be absent long.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Will Jean and Pierre go with me?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No; they would refuse now, but presently they will come, and with them
      they will bring my parents’ blessing, and likewise their consent that I
      take up my mission. I shall be stronger, then—stronger for that; for
      lack of it I am weak now.” She paused a little while, and the tears
      gathered in her eyes; then she went on: “I would say good-by to Little
      Mengette. Bring her outside the village at dawn; she must go with me a
      little of the way—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And Haumette?”
     </p>
    <p>
      She broke down and began to cry, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “No, oh, no—she is too dear to me, I could not bear it, knowing I
      should never look upon her face again.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Next morning I brought Mengette, and we four walked along the road in the
      cold dawn till the village was far behind; then the two girls said their
      good-bys, clinging about each other’s neck, and pouring out their grief in
      loving words and tears, a pitiful sight to see. And Joan took one long
      look back upon the distant village, and the Fairy Tree, and the oak
      forest, and the flowery plain, and the river, as if she was trying to
      print these scenes on her memory so that they would abide there always and
      not fade, for she knew she would not see them any more in this life; then
      she turned, and went from us, sobbing bitterly. It was her birthday and
      mine. She was seventeen years old.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 2 The Governor Speeds Joan
    </h3>
    <p>
      After a few days, Laxart took Joan to Vaucouleurs, and found lodging and
      guardianship for her with Catherine Royer, a wheelwright’s wife, an honest
      and good woman. Joan went to mass regularly, she helped do the housework,
      earning her keep in that way, and if any wished to talk with her about her
      mission—and many did—she talked freely, making no concealments
      regarding the matter now. I was soon housed near by, and witnessed the
      effects which followed. At once the tidings spread that a young girl was
      come who was appointed of God to save France. The common people flocked in
      crowds to look at her and speak with her, and her fair young loveliness
      won the half of their belief, and her deep earnestness and transparent
      sincerity won the other half. The well-to-do remained away and scoffed,
      but that is their way.
    </p>
    <p>
      Next, a prophecy of Merlin’s, more than eight hundred years old, was
      called to mind, which said that in a far future time France would be lost
      by a woman and restored by a woman. France was now, for the first time,
      lost—and by a woman, Isabel of Bavaria, her base Queen; doubtless
      this fair and pure young girl was commissioned of Heaven to complete the
      prophecy.
    </p>
    <p>
      This gave the growing interest a new and powerful impulse; the excitement
      rose higher and higher, and hope and faith along with it; and so from
      Vaucouleurs wave after wave of this inspiring enthusiasm flowed out over
      the land, far and wide, invading all the villages and refreshing and
      revivifying the perishing children of France; and from these villages came
      people who wanted to see for themselves, hear for themselves; and they did
      see and hear, and believe. They filled the town; they more than filled it;
      inns and lodgings were packed, and yet half of the inflow had to go
      without shelter. And still they came, winter as it was, for when a man’s
      soul is starving, what does he care for meat and roof so he can but get
      that nobler hunger fed? Day after day, and still day after day the great
      tide rose. Domremy was dazed, amazed, stupefied, and said to itself, “Was
      this world-wonder in our familiar midst all these years and we too dull to
      see it?” Jean and Pierre went out from the village, stared at and envied
      like the great and fortunate of the earth, and their progress to
      Vaucouleurs was like a triumph, all the country-side flocking to see and
      salute the brothers of one with whom angels had spoken face to face, and
      into whose hands by command of God they had delivered the destinies of
      France.
    </p>
    <p>
      The brothers brought the parents’ blessing and godspeed to Joan, and their
      promise to bring it to her in person later; and so, with this culminating
      happiness in her heart and the high hope it inspired, she went and
      confronted the governor again. But he was no more tractable than he had
      been before. He refused to send her to the King. She was disappointed, but
      in no degree discouraged. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I must still come to you until I get the men-at-arms; for so it is
      commanded, and I may not disobey. I must go to the Dauphin, though I go on
      my knees.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I and the two brothers were with Joan daily, to see the people that came
      and hear what they said; and one day, sure enough, the Sieur Jean de Metz
      came. He talked with her in a petting and playful way, as one talks with
      children, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “What are you doing here, my little maid? Will they drive the King out of
      France, and shall we all turn English?”
     </p>
    <p>
      She answered him in her tranquil, serious way:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I am come to bid Robert de Baudricourt take or send me to the King, but
      he does not heed my words.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, you have an admirable persistence, truly; a whole year has not turned
      you from your wish. I saw you when you came before.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan said, as tranquilly as before:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is not a wish, it is a purpose. He will grant it. I can wait.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, perhaps it will not be wise to make too sure of that, my child. These
      governors are stubborn people to deal with. In case he shall not grant
      your prayer—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He will grant it. He must. It is not a matter of choice.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The gentleman’s playful mood began to disappear—one could see that,
      by his face. Joan’s earnestness was affecting him. It always happened that
      people who began in jest with her ended by being in earnest. They soon
      began to perceive depths in her that they had not suspected; and then her
      manifest sincerity and the rocklike steadfastness of her convictions were
      forces which cowed levity, and it could not maintain its self-respect in
      their presence. The Sieur de Metz was thoughtful for a moment or two, then
      he began, quite soberly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Is it necessary that you go to the King soon?—that is, I mean—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Before Mid-Lent, even though I wear away my legs to the knees!”
     </p>
    <p>
      She said it with that sort of repressed fieriness that means so much when
      a person’s heart is in a thing. You could see the response in that
      nobleman’s face; you could see his eye light up; there was sympathy there.
      He said, most earnestly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “God knows I think you should have the men-at-arms, and that somewhat
      would come of it. What is it that you would do? What is your hope and
      purpose?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “To rescue France. And it is appointed that I shall do it. For no one else
      in the world, neither kings, nor dukes, no any other, can recover the
      kingdom of France, and there is no help but in me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The words had a pleading and pathetic sound, and they touched that good
      nobleman. I saw it plainly. Joan dropped her voice a little, and said:
      “But indeed I would rather spin with my poor mother, for this is not my
      calling; but I must go and do it, for it is my Lord’s will.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Who is your Lord?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He is God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then the Sieur de Metz, following the impressive old feudal fashion, knelt
      and laid his hands within Joan’s in sign of fealty, and made oath that by
      God’s help he himself would take her to the king.
    </p>
    <p>
      The next day came the Sieur Bertrand de Poulengy, and he also pledged his
      oath and knightly honor to abide with her and follow her witherosever she
      might lead.
    </p>
    <p>
      This day, too, toward evening, a great rumor went flying abroad through
      the town—namely, that the very governor himself was going to visit
      the young girl in her humble lodgings. So in the morning the streets and
      lanes were packed with people waiting to see if this strange thing would
      indeed happen. And happen it did. The governor rode in state, attended by
      his guards, and the news of it went everywhere, and made a great
      sensation, and modified the scoffings of the people of quality and raised
      Joan’s credit higher than ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      The governor had made up his mind to one thing: Joan was either a witch or
      a saint, and he meant to find out which it was. So he brought a priest
      with him to exorcise the devil that was in her in case there was one
      there. The priest performed his office, but found no devil. He merely hurt
      Joan’s feelings and offended her piety without need, for he had already
      confessed her before this, and should have known, if he knew anything,
      that devils cannot abide the confessional, but utter cries of anguish and
      the most profane and furious cursings whenever they are confronted with
      that holy office.
    </p>
    <p>
      The governor went away troubled and full of thought, and not knowing what
      to do. And while he pondered and studied, several days went by and the
      14th of February was come. Then Joan went to the castle and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “In God’s name, Robert de Baudricourt, you are too slow about sending me,
      and have caused damage thereby, for this day the Dauphin’s cause has lost
      a battle near Orleans, and will suffer yet greater injury if you do not
      send me to him soon.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The governor was perplexed by this speech, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “To-day, child, to-day? How can you know what has happened in that region
      to-day? It would take eight or ten days for the word to come.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “My Voices have brought the word to me, and it is true. A battle was lost
      to-day, and you are in fault to delay me so.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The governor walked the floor awhile, talking within himself, but letting
      a great oath fall outside now and then; and finally he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Harkye! go in peace, and wait. If it shall turn out as you say, I will
      give you the letter and send you to the King, and not otherwise.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan said with fervor:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now God be thanked, these waiting days are almost done. In nine days you
      will fetch me the letter.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Already the people of Vaucouleurs had given her a horse and had armed and
      equipped her as a soldier. She got no chance to try the horse and see if
      she could ride it, for her great first duty was to abide at her post and
      lift up the hopes and spirits of all who would come to talk with her, and
      prepare them to help in the rescue and regeneration of the kingdom. This
      occupied every waking moment she had. But it was no matter. There was
      nothing she could not learn—and in the briefest time, too. Her horse
      would find this out in the first hour. Meantime the brothers and I took
      the horse in turn and began to learn to ride. And we had teaching in the
      use of the sword and other arms also.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the 20th Joan called her small army together—the two knights and
      her two brothers and me—for a private council of war. No, it was not
      a council, that is not the right name, for she did not consult with us,
      she merely gave us orders. She mapped out the course she would travel
      toward the King, and did it like a person perfectly versed in geography;
      and this itinerary of daily marches was so arranged as to avoid here and
      there peculiarly dangerous regions by flank movements—which showed
      that she knew her political geography as intimately as she knew her
      physical geography; yet she had never had a day’s schooling, of course,
      and was without education. I was astonished, but thought her Voices must
      have taught her. But upon reflection I saw that this was not so. By her
      references to what this and that and the other person had told her, I
      perceived that she had been diligently questioning those crowds of
      visiting strangers, and that out of them she had patiently dug all this
      mass of invaluable knowledge. The two knights were filled with wonder at
      her good sense and sagacity.
    </p>
    <p>
      She commanded us to make preparations to travel by night and sleep by day
      in concealment, as almost the whole of our long journey would be through
      the enemy’s country.
    </p>
    <p>
      Also, she commanded that we should keep the date of our departure a
      secret, since she meant to get away unobserved. Otherwise we should be
      sent off with a grand demonstration which would advertise us to the enemy,
      and we should be ambushed and captured somewhere. Finally she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Nothing remains, now, but that I confide to you the date of our
      departure, so that you may make all needful preparation in time, leaving
      nothing to be done in haste and badly at the last moment. We march the
      23d, at eleven of the clock at night.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then we were dismissed. The two knights were startled—yes, and
      troubled; and the Sieur Bertrand said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Even if the governor shall really furnish the letter and the escort, he
      still may not do it in time to meet the date she has chosen. Then how can
      she venture to name that date? It is a great risk—a great risk to
      select and decide upon the date, in this state of uncertainty.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Since she has named the 23d, we may trust her. The Voices have told her,
      I think. We shall do best to obey.”
     </p>
    <p>
      We did obey. Joan’s parents were notified to come before the 23d, but
      prudence forbade that they be told why this limit was named.
    </p>
    <p>
      All day, the 23d, she glanced up wistfully whenever new bodies of
      strangers entered the house, but her parents did not appear. Still she was
      not discouraged, but hoped on. But when night fell at last, her hopes
      perished, and the tears came; however, she dashed them away, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It was to be so, no doubt; no doubt it was so ordered; I must bear it,
      and will.”
     </p>
    <p>
      De Metz tried to comfort her by saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The governor sends no word; it may be that they will come to-morrow, and—”
     </p>
    <p>
      He got no further, for she interrupted him, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “To what good end? We start at eleven to-night.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And it was so. At ten the governor came, with his guard and arms, with
      horses and equipment for me and for the brothers, and gave Joan a letter
      to the King. Then he took off his sword, and belted it about her waist
      with his own hands, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You said true, child. The battle was lost, on the day you said. So I have
      kept my word. Now go—come of it what may.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan gave him thanks, and he went his way.
    </p>
    <p>
      The lost battle was the famous disaster that is called in history the
      Battle of the Herrings.
    </p>
    <p>
      All the lights in the house were at once put out, and a little while
      after, when the streets had become dark and still, we crept stealthily
      through them and out at the western gate and rode away under whip and
      spur.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 3 The Paladin Groans and Boasts
    </h3>

    <p>
      WE WERE twenty-five strong, and well equipped. We rode in double file,
      Joan and her brothers in the center of the column, with Jean de Metz at
      the head of it and the Sieur Bertrand at its extreme rear. In two or three
      hours we should be in the enemy’s country, and then none would venture to
      desert. By and by we began to hear groans and sobs and execrations from
      different points along the line, and upon inquiry found that six of our
      men were peasants who had never ridden a horse before, and were finding it
      very difficult to stay in their saddles, and moreover were now beginning
      to suffer considerable bodily torture. They had been seized by the
      governor at the last moment and pressed into the service to make up the
      tale, and he had placed a veteran alongside of each with orders to help
      him stick to the saddle, and kill him if he tried to desert.
    </p>
    <p>
      These poor devils had kept quiet as long as they could, but their physical
      miseries were become so sharp by this time that they were obliged to give
      them vent. But we were within the enemy’s country now, so there was no
      help for them, they must continue the march, though Joan said that if they
      chose to take the risk they might depart. They preferred to stay with us.
      We modified our pace now, and moved cautiously, and the new men were
      warned to keep their sorrows to themselves and not get the command into
      danger with their curses and lamentations.
    </p>
    <p>
      Toward dawn we rode deep into a forest, and soon all but the sentries were
      sound asleep in spite of the cold ground and the frosty air.
    </p>
    <p>
      I woke at noon out of such a solid and stupefying sleep that at first my
      wits were all astray, and I did not know where I was nor what had been
      happening. Then my senses cleared, and I remembered. As I lay there
      thinking over the strange events of the past month or two the thought came
      into my mind, greatly surprising me, that one of Joan’s prophecies had
      failed; for where were Noel and the Paladin, who were to join us at the
      eleventh hour? By this time, you see, I had gotten used to expecting
      everything Joan said to come true. So, being disturbed and troubled by
      these thoughts, I opened my eyes. Well, there stood the Paladin leaning
      against a tree and looking down on me! How often that happens; you think
      of a person, or speak of a person, and there he stands before you, and you
      not dreaming he is near. It looks as if his being near is really the thing
      that makes you think of him, and not just an accident, as people imagine.
      Well, be that as it may, there was the Paladin, anyway, looking down in my
      face and waiting for me to wake. I was ever so glad to see him, and jumped
      up and shook him by the hand, and led him a little way from the camp—he
      limping like a cripple—and told him to sit down, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now, where have you dropped down from? And how did you happen to light in
      this place? And what do the soldier-clothes mean? Tell me all about it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He answered:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I marched with you last night.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No!” (To myself I said, “The prophecy has not all failed—half of it
      has come true.”) “Yes, I did. I hurried up from Domremy to join, and was
      within a half a minute of being too late. In fact, I was too late, but I
      begged so hard that the governor was touched by my brave devotion to my
      country’s cause—those are the words he used—and so he yielded,
      and allowed me to come.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I thought to myself, this is a lie, he is one of those six the governor
      recruited by force at the last moment; I know it, for Joan’s prophecy said
      he would join at the eleventh hour, but not by his own desire. Then I said
      aloud:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I am glad you came; it is a noble cause, and one should not sit at home
      in times like these.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Sit at home! I could no more do it than the thunderstone could stay hid
      in the clouds when the storm calls it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is the right talk. It sounds like you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That pleased him.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I’m glad you know me. Some don’t. But they will, presently. They will
      know me well enough before I get done with this war.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is what I think. I believe that wherever danger confronts you you
      will make yourself conspicuous.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He was charmed with this speech, and it swelled him up like a bladder. He
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If I know myself—and I think I do—my performances in this
      campaign will give you occasion more than once to remember those words.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I were a fool to doubt it. That I know.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I shall not be at my best, being but a common soldier; still, the country
      will hear of me. If I were where I belong; if I were in the place of La
      Hire, or Saintrailles, or the Bastard of Orleans—well, I say
      nothing. I am not of the talking kind, like Noel Rainguesson and his sort,
      I thank God. But it will be something, I take it—a novelty in this
      world, I should say—to raise the fame of a private soldier above
      theirs, and extinguish the glory of their names with its shadow.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why, look here, my friend,” I said, “do you know that you have hit out a
      most remarkable idea there? Do you realize the gigantic proportions of it?
      For look you; to be a general of vast renown, what is that? Nothing—history
      is clogged and confused with them; one cannot keep their names in his
      memory, there are so many. But a common soldier of supreme renown—why,
      he would stand alone! He would the be one moon in a firmament of
      mustard-seed stars; his name would outlast the human race! My friend, who
      gave you that idea?”
     </p>
    <p>
      He was ready to burst with happiness, but he suppressed betrayal of it as
      well as he could. He simply waved the compliment aside with his hand and
      said, with complacency:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is nothing. I have them often—ideas like that—and even
      greater ones. I do not consider this one much.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You astonish me; you do, indeed. So it is really your own?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Quite. And there is plenty more where it came from”—tapping his
      head with his finger, and taking occasion at the same time to cant his
      morion over his right ear, which gave him a very self-satisfied air—“I
      do not need to borrow my ideas, like Noel Rainguesson.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Speaking of Noel, when did you see him last?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Half an hour ago. He is sleeping yonder like a corpse. Rode with us last
      night.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I felt a great upleap in my heart, and said to myself, now I am at rest
      and glad; I will never doubt her prophecies again. Then I said aloud:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It gives me joy. It makes me proud of our village. There is not keeping
      our lion-hearts at home in these great times, I see that.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Lion-heart! Who—that baby? Why, he begged like a dog to be let off.
      Cried, and said he wanted to go to his mother. Him a lion-heart!—that
      tumble-bug!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Dear me, why I supposed he volunteered, of course. Didn’t he?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, yes, he volunteered the way people do to the headsman. Why, when he
      found I was coming up from Domremy to volunteer, he asked me to let him
      come along in my protection, and see the crowds and the excitement. Well,
      we arrived and saw the torches filing out at the Castle, and ran there,
      and the governor had him seized, along with four more, and he begged to be
      let off, and I begged for his place, and at last the governor allowed me
      to join, but wouldn’t let Noel off, because he was disgusted with him, he
      was such a cry-baby. Yes, and much good he’ll do the King’s service; he’ll
      eat for six and run for sixteen. I hate a pygmy with half a heart and nine
      stomachs!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why, this is very surprising news to me, and I am sorry and disappointed
      to hear it. I thought he was a very manly fellow.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Paladin gave me an outraged look, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I don’t see how you can talk like that, I’m sure I don’t. I don’t see how
      you could have got such a notion. I don’t dislike him, and I’m not saying
      these things out of prejudice, for I don’t allow myself to have prejudices
      against people. I like him, and have always comraded with him from the
      cradle, but he must allow me to speak my mind about his faults, and I am
      willing he shall speak his about mine, if I have any. And, true enough,
      maybe I have; but I reckon they’ll bear inspection—I have that idea,
      anyway. A manly fellow! You should have heard him whine and wail and
      swear, last night, because the saddle hurt him. Why didn’t the saddle hurt
      me? Pooh—I was as much at home in it as if I had been born there.
      And yet it was the first time I was ever on a horse. All those old
      soldiers admired my riding; they said they had never seen anything like
      it. But him—why, they had to hold him on, all the time.”
     </p>
    <p>
      An odor as of breakfast came stealing through the wood; the Paladin
      unconsciously inflated his nostrils in lustful response, and got up and
      limped painfully away, saying he must go and look to his horse.
    </p>
    <p>
      At bottom he was all right and a good-hearted giant, without any harm in
      him, for it is no harm to bark, if one stops there and does not bite, and
      it is no harm to be an ass, if one is content to bray and not kick. If
      this vast structure of brawn and muscle and vanity and foolishness seemed
      to have a libelous tongue, what of it? There was no malice behind it; and
      besides, the defect was not of his own creation; it was the work of Noel
      Rainguesson, who had nurtured it, fostered it, built it up and perfected
      it, for the entertainment he got out of it. His careless light heart had
      to have somebody to nag and chaff and make fun of, the Paladin had only
      needed development in order to meet its requirements, consequently the
      development was taken in hand and diligently attended to and looked after,
      gnat-and-bull fashion, for years, to the neglect and damage of far more
      important concerns. The result was an unqualified success. Noel prized the
      society of the Paladin above everybody else’s; the Paladin preferred
      anybody’s to Noel’s. The big fellow was often seen with the little fellow,
      but it was for the same reason that the bull is often seen with the gnat.
    </p>
    <p>
      With the first opportunity, I had a talk with Noel. I welcomed him to our
      expedition, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It was fine and brave of you to volunteer, Noel.”
     </p>
    <p>
      His eye twinkled, and he answered:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, it was rather fine, I think. Still, the credit doesn’t all belong to
      me; I had help.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Who helped you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The governor.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “How?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Well, I’ll tell you the whole thing. I came up from Domremy to see the
      crowds and the general show, for I hadn’t ever had any experience of such
      things, of course, and this was a great opportunity; but I hadn’t any mind
      to volunteer. I overtook the Paladin on the road and let him have my
      company the rest of the way, although he did not want it and said so; and
      while we were gawking and blinking in the glare of the governor’s torches
      they seized us and four more and added us to the escort, and that is
      really how I came to volunteer. But, after all, I wasn’t sorry,
      remembering how dull life would have been in the village without the
      Paladin.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “How did he feel about it? Was he satisfied?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I think he was glad.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Because he said he wasn’t. He was taken by surprise, you see, and it is
      not likely that he could tell the truth without preparation. Not that he
      would have prepared, if he had had the chance, for I do not think he
      would. I am not charging him with that. In the same space of time that he
      could prepare to speak the truth, he could also prepare to lie; besides,
      his judgment would be cool then, and would warn him against fooling with
      new methods in an emergency. No, I am sure he was glad, because he said he
      wasn’t.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Do you think he was very glad?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, I know he was. He begged like a slave, and bawled for his mother. He
      said his health was delicate, and he didn’t know how to ride a horse, and
      he knew he couldn’t outlive the first march. But really he wasn’t looking
      as delicate as he was feeling. There was a cask of wine there, a proper
      lift for four men. The governor’s temper got afire, and he delivered an
      oath at him that knocked up the dust where it struck the ground, and told
      him to shoulder that cask or he would carve him to cutlets and send him
      home in a basket. The Paladin did it, and that secured his promotion to a
      privacy in the escort without any further debate.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, you seem to make it quite plain that he was glad to join—that
      is, if your premises are right that you start from. How did he stand the
      march last night?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “About as I did. If he made the more noise, it was the privilege of his
      bulk. We stayed in our saddles because we had help. We are equally lame
      to-day, and if he likes to sit down, let him; I prefer to stand.”
     </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 4 Joan Leads Us Through the Enemy
    </h3>
    <p>
      WE WERE called to quarters and subjected to a searching inspection by
      Joan. Then she made a short little talk in which she said that even the
      rude business of war could be conducted better without profanity and other
      brutalities of speech than with them, and that she should strictly require
      us to remember and apply this admonition. She ordered half an hour’s
      horsemanship drill for the novices then, and appointed one of the veterans
      to conduct it. It was a ridiculous exhibition, but we learned something,
      and Joan was satisfied and complimented us. She did not take any
      instruction herself or go through the evolutions and manoeuvres, but
      merely sat her horse like a martial little statue and looked on. That was
      sufficient for her, you see. She would not miss or forget a detail of the
      lesson, she would take it all in with her eye and her mind, and apply it
      afterward with as much certainty and confidence as if she had already
      practised it.
    </p>
    <p>
      We now made three night marches of twelve or thirteen leagues each, riding
      in peace and undisturbed, being taken for a roving band of Free
      Companions. Country-folk were glad to have that sort of people go by
      without stopping. Still, they were very wearying marches, and not
      comfortable, for the bridges were few and the streams many, and as we had
      to ford them we found the water dismally cold, and afterward had to bed
      ourselves, still wet, on the frosty or snowy ground, and get warm as we
      might and sleep if we could, for it would not have been prudent to build
      fires. Our energies languished under these hardships and deadly fatigues,
      but Joan’s did not. Her step kept its spring and firmness and her eye its
      fire. We could only wonder at this, we could not explain it.
    </p>
    <p>
      But if we had had hard times before, I know not what to call the five
      nights that now followed, for the marches were as fatiguing, the baths as
      cold, and we were ambuscaded seven times in addition, and lost two novices
      and three veterans in the resulting fights. The news had leaked out and
      gone abroad that the inspired Virgin of Vaucouleurs was making for the
      King with an escort, and all the roads were being watched now.
    </p>
    <p>
      These five nights disheartened the command a good deal. This was
      aggravated by a discovery which Noel made, and which he promptly made
      known at headquarters. Some of the men had been trying to understand why
      Joan continued to be alert, vigorous, and confident while the strongest
      men in the company were fagged with the heavy marches and exposure and
      were become morose and irritable. There, it shows you how men can have
      eyes and yet not see. All their lives those men had seen their own
      women-folks hitched up with a cow and dragging the plow in the fields
      while the men did the driving. They had also seen other evidences that
      women have far more endurance and patience and fortitude than men—but
      what good had their seeing these things been to them? None. It had taught
      them nothing. They were still surprised to see a girl of seventeen bear
      the fatigues of war better than trained veterans of the army. Moreover,
      they did not reflect that a great soul, with a great purpose, can make a
      weak body strong and keep it so; and here was the greatest soul in the
      universe; but how could they know that, those dumb creatures? No, they
      knew nothing, and their reasonings were of a piece with their ignorance.
      They argued and discussed among themselves, with Noel listening, and
      arrived at the decision that Joan was a witch, and had her strange pluck
      and strength from Satan; so they made a plan to watch for a safe
      opportunity to take her life.
    </p>
    <p>
      To have secret plottings of this sort going on in our midst was a very
      serious business, of course, and the knights asked Joan’s permission to
      hang the plotters, but she refused without hesitancy. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Neither these men nor any others can take my life before my mission is
      accomplished, therefore why should I have their blood upon my hands? I
      will inform them of this, and also admonish them. Call them before me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      When they came she made that statement to them in a plain matter-of-fact
      way, and just as if the thought never entered her mind that any one could
      doubt it after she had given her word that it was true. The men were
      evidently amazed and impressed to hear her say such a thing in such a sure
      and confident way, for prophecies boldly uttered never fall barren on
      superstitious ears. Yes, this speech certainly impressed them, but her
      closing remark impressed them still more. It was for the ringleader, and
      Joan said it sorrowfully:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is a pity that you should plot another’s death when your own is so
      close at hand.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That man’s horse stumbled and fell on him in the first ford which we
      crossed that night, and he was drowned before we could help him. We had no
      more conspiracies.
    </p>
    <p>
      This night was harassed with ambuscades, but we got through without having
      any men killed. One more night would carry us over the hostile frontier if
      we had good luck, and we saw the night close down with a good deal of
      solicitude. Always before, we had been more or less reluctant to start out
      into the gloom and the silence to be frozen in the fords and persecuted by
      the enemy, but this time we were impatient to get under way and have it
      over, although there was promise of more and harder fighting than any of
      the previous nights had furnished. Moreover, in front of us about three
      leagues there was a deep stream with a frail wooden bridge over it, and as
      a cold rain mixed with snow had been falling steadily all day we were
      anxious to find out whether we were in a trap or not. If the swollen
      stream had washed away the bridge, we might properly consider ourselves
      trapped and cut off from escape.
    </p>
    <p>
      As soon as it was dark we filed out from the depth of the forest where we
      had been hidden and began the march. From the time that we had begun to
      encounter ambushes Joan had ridden at the head of the column, and she took
      this post now. By the time we had gone a league the rain and snow had
      turned to sleet, and under the impulse of the storm-wind it lashed my face
      like whips, and I envied Joan and the knights, who could close their
      visors and shut up their heads in their helmets as in a box. Now, out of
      the pitchy darkness and close at hand, came the sharp command:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Halt!”
     </p>
    <p>
      We obeyed. I made out a dim mass in front of us which might be a body of
      horsemen, but one could not be sure. A man rode up and said to Joan in a
      tone of reproof:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Well, you have taken your time, truly. And what have you found out? Is
      she still behind us, or in front?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan answered in a level voice:
    </p>
    <p>
      “She is still behind.”
     </p>
    <p>
      This news softened the stranger’s tone. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If you know that to be true, you have not lost your time, Captain. But
      are you sure? How do you know?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Because I have seen her.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Seen her! Seen the Virgin herself?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, I have been in her camp.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Is it possible! Captain Raymond, I ask you to pardon me for speaking in
      that tone just now. You have performed a daring and admirable service.
      Where was she camped?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “In the forest, not more than a league from here.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Good! I was afraid we might be still behind her, but now that we know she
      is behind us, everything is safe. She is our game. We will hang her. You
      shall hang her yourself. No one has so well earned the privilege of
      abolishing this pestilent limb of Satan.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I do not know how to thank you sufficiently. If we catch her, I—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “If! I will take care of that; give yourself no uneasiness. All I want is
      just a look at her, to see what the imp is like that has been able to make
      all this noise, then you and the halter may have her. How many men has
      she?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I counted but eighteen, but she may have had two or three pickets out.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Is that all? It won’t be a mouthful for my force. Is it true that she is
      only a girl?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes; she is not more than seventeen.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It passes belief! Is she robust, or slender?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Slender.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The officer pondered a moment or two, then he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Was she preparing to break camp?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Not when I had my last glimpse of her.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What was she doing?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “She was talking quietly with an officer.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Quietly? Not giving orders?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No, talking as quietly as we are now.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is good. She is feeling a false security. She would have been
      restless and fussy else—it is the way of her sex when danger is
      about. As she was making no preparation to break camp—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “She certainly was not when I saw her last.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “—and was chatting quietly and at her ease, it means that this
      weather is not to her taste. Night-marching in sleet and wind is not for
      chits of seventeen. No; she will stay where she is. She has my thanks. We
      will camp, ourselves; here is as good a place as any. Let us get about
      it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “If you command it—certainly. But she has two knights with her. They
      might force her to march, particularly if the weather should improve.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was scared, and impatient to be getting out of this peril, and it
      distressed and worried me to have Joan apparently set herself to work to
      make delay and increase the danger—still, I thought she probably
      knew better than I what to do. The officer said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Well, in that case we are here to block the way.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, if they come this way. But if they should send out spies, and find
      out enough to make them want to try for the bridge through the woods? Is
      it best to allow the bridge to stand?”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made me shiver to hear her.
    </p>
    <p>
      The officer considered awhile, then said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It might be well enough to send a force to destroy the bridge. I was
      intending to occupy it with the whole command, but that is not necessary
      now.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan said, tranquilly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “With your permission, I will go and destroy it myself.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Ah, now I saw her idea, and was glad she had had the cleverness to invent
      it and the ability to keep her head cool and think of it in that tight
      place. The officer replied:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You have it, Captain, and my thanks. With you to do it, it will be well
      done; I could send another in your place, but not a better.”
     </p>
    <p>
      They saluted, and we moved forward. I breathed freer. A dozen times I had
      imagined I heard the hoofbeats of the real Captain Raymond’s troop
      arriving behind us, and had been sitting on pins and needles all the while
      that that conversation was dragging along. I breathed freer, but was still
      not comfortable, for Joan had given only the simple command, “Forward!”
       Consequently we moved in a walk. Moved in a dead walk past a dim and
      lengthening column of enemies at our side. The suspense was exhausting,
      yet it lasted but a short while, for when the enemy’s bugles sang the
      “Dismount!” Joan gave the word to trot, and that was a great relief to me.
      She was always at herself, you see. Before the command to dismount had
      been given, somebody might have wanted the countersign somewhere along
      that line if we came flying by at speed, but now we seemed to be on our
      way to our allotted camping position, so we were allowed to pass
      unchallenged. The further we went the more formidable was the strength
      revealed by the hostile force. Perhaps it was only a hundred or two, but
      to me it seemed a thousand. When we passed the last of these people I was
      thankful, and the deeper we plowed into the darkness beyond them the
      better I felt. I came nearer and nearer to feeling good, for an hour; then
      we found the bridge still standing, and I felt entirely good. We crossed
      it and destroyed it, and then I felt—but I cannot describe what I
      felt. One has to feel it himself in order to know what it is like.
    </p>
    <p>
      We had expected to hear the rush of a pursuing force behind us, for we
      thought that the real Captain Raymond would arrive and suggest that
      perhaps the troop that had been mistaken for his belonged to the Virgin of
      Vaucouleurs; but he must have been delayed seriously, for when we resumed
      our march beyond the river there were no sounds behind us except those
      which the storm was furnishing.
    </p>
    <p>
      I said that Joan had harvested a good many compliments intended for
      Captain Raymond, and that he would find nothing of a crop left but a dry
      stubble of reprimands when he got back, and a commander just in the humor
      to superintend the gathering of it in.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It will be as you say, no doubt; for the commander took a troop for
      granted, in the night and unchallenged, and would have camped without
      sending a force to destroy the bridge if he had been left unadvised, and
      none are so ready to find fault with others as those who do things worthy
      of blame themselves.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Sieur Bertrand was amused at Joan’s naive way of referring to her
      advice as if it had been a valuable present to a hostile leader who was
      saved by it from making a censurable blunder of omission, and then he went
      on to admire how ingeniously she had deceived that man and yet had not
      told him anything that was not the truth. This troubled Joan, and she
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I thought he was deceiving himself. I forbore to tell him lies, for that
      would have been wrong; but if my truths deceived him, perhaps that made
      them lies, and I am to blame. I would God I knew if I have done wrong.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was assured that she had done right, and that in the perils and
      necessities of war deceptions that help one’s own cause and hurt the
      enemy’s were always permissible; but she was not quite satisfied with
      that, and thought that even when a great cause was in danger one ought to
      have the privilege of trying honorable ways first. Jean said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, you told us yourself that you were going to Uncle Laxart’s to nurse
      his wife, but you didn’t say you were going further, yet you did go on to
      Vaucouleurs. There!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I see now,” said Joan, sorrowfully. “I told no lie, yet I deceived. I had
      tried all other ways first, but I could not get away, and I had to get
      away. My mission required it. I did wrong, I think, and am to blame.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was silent a moment, turning the matter over in her mind, then she
      added, with quiet decision, “But the thing itself was right, and I would
      do it again.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It seemed an over-nice distinction, but nobody said anything. If we had
      known her as well as she knew herself, and as her later history revealed
      her to us, we should have perceived that she had a clear meaning there,
      and that her position was not identical with ours, as we were supposing,
      but occupied a higher plane. She would sacrifice herself—and her
      best self; that is, her truthfulness—to save her cause; but only
      that; she would not buy her life at that cost; whereas our war-ethics
      permitted the purchase of our lives, or any mere military advantage, small
      or great, by deception. Her saying seemed a commonplace at the time, the
      essence of its meaning escaping us; but one sees now that it contained a
      principle which lifted it above that and made it great and fine.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently the wind died down, the sleet stopped falling, and the cold was
      less severe. The road was become a bog, and the horses labored through it
      at a walk—they could do no better. As the heavy time wore on,
      exhaustion overcame us, and we slept in our saddles. Not even the dangers
      that threatened us could keep us awake.
    </p>
    <p>
      This tenth night seemed longer than any of the others, and of course it
      was the hardest, because we had been accumulating fatigue from the
      beginning, and had more of it on hand now than at any previous time. But
      we were not molested again. When the dull dawn came at last we saw a river
      before us and we knew it was the Loire; we entered the town of Gien, and
      knew we were in a friendly land, with the hostiles all behind us. That was
      a glad morning for us.
    </p>
    <p>
      We were a worn and bedraggled and shabby-looking troop; and still, as
      always, Joan was the freshest of us all, in both body and spirits. We had
      averaged above thirteen leagues a night, by tortuous and wretched roads.
      It was a remarkable march, and shows what men can do when they have a
      leader with a determined purpose and a resolution that never flags.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 5 We Pierce the Last Ambuscades
    </h3>

    <p>
      WE RESTED and otherwise refreshed ourselves two or three hours at Gien,
      but by that time the news was abroad that the young girl commissioned of
      God to deliver France was come; wherefore, such a press of people flocked
      to our quarters to get sight of her that it seemed best to seek a quieter
      place; so we pushed on and halted at a small village called Fierbois.
    </p>
    <p>
      We were now within six leagues of the King, who was at the Castle of
      Chinon. Joan dictated a letter to him at once, and I wrote it. In it she
      said she had come a hundred and fifty leagues to bring him good news, and
      begged the privilege of delivering it in person. She added that although
      she had never seen him she would know him in any disguise and would point
      him out.
    </p>
    <p>
      The two knights rode away at once with the letter. The troop slept all the
      afternoon, and after supper we felt pretty fresh and fine, especially our
      little group of young Domremians. We had the comfortable tap-room of the
      village inn to ourselves, and for the first time in ten unspeakably long
      days were exempt from bodings and terrors and hardships and fatiguing
      labors. The Paladin was suddenly become his ancient self again, and was
      swaggering up and down, a very monument of self-complacency. Noel
      Rainguesson said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I think it is wonderful, the way he has brought us through.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Who?” asked Jean.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Why, the Paladin.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Paladin seemed not to hear.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What had he to do with it?” asked Pierre d’Arc.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Everything. It was nothing but Joan’s confidence in his discretion that
      enabled her to keep up her heart. She could depend on us and on herself
      for valor, but discretion is the winning thing in war, after all;
      discretion is the rarest and loftiest of qualities, and he has got more of
      it than any other man in France—more of it, perhaps, than any other
      sixty men in France.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now you are getting ready to make a fool of yourself, Noel Rainguesson,”
       said the Paladin, “and you want to coil some of that long tongue of yours
      around your neck and stick the end of it in your ear, then you’ll be the
      less likely to get into trouble.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I didn’t know he had more discretion than other people,” said Pierre,
      “for discretion argues brains, and he hasn’t any more brains than the rest
      of us, in my opinion.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No, you are wrong there. Discretion hasn’t anything to do with brains;
      brains are an obstruction to it, for it does not reason, it feels. Perfect
      discretion means absence of brains. Discretion is a quality of the heart—solely
      a quality of the heart; it acts upon us through feeling. We know this
      because if it were an intellectual quality it would only perceive a
      danger, for instance, where a danger exists; whereas—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Hear him twaddle—the damned idiot!” muttered the Paladin.
    </p>
    <p>
      “—whereas, it being purely a quality of the heart, and proceeding by
      feeling, not reason, its reach is correspondingly wider and sublimer,
      enabling it to perceive and avoid dangers that haven’t any existence at
      all; as, for instance, that night in the fog, when the Paladin took his
      horse’s ears for hostile lances and got off and climbed a tree—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It’s a lie! a lie without shadow of foundation, and I call upon you all
      to beware you give credence to the malicious inventions of this ramshackle
      slander-mill that has been doing its best to destroy my character for
      years, and will grind up your own reputations for you next. I got off to
      tighten my saddle-girth—I wish I may die in my tracks if it isn’t so—and
      whoever wants to believe it can, and whoever don’t can let it alone.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “There, that is the way with him, you see; he never can discuss a theme
      temperately, but always flies off the handle and becomes disagreeable. And
      you notice his defect of memory. He remembers getting off his horse, but
      forgets all the rest, even the tree. But that is natural; he would
      remember getting off the horse because he was so used to doing it. He
      always did it when there was an alarm and the clash of arms at the front.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why did he choose that time for it?” asked Jean.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I don’t know. To tighten up his girth, he thinks, to climb a tree, I
      think; I saw him climb nine trees in a single night.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You saw nothing of the kind! A person that can lie like that deserves no
      one’s respect. I ask you all to answer me. Do you believe what this
      reptile has said?”
     </p>
    <p>
      All seemed embarrassed, and only Pierre replied. He said, hesitatingly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I—well, I hardly know what to say. It is a delicate situation. It
      seems offensive to me to refuse to believe a person when he makes so
      direct a statement, and yet I am obliged to say, rude as it may appear,
      that I am not able to believe the whole of it—no, I am not able to
      believe that you climbed nine trees.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “There!” cried the Paladin; “now what do you think of yourself, Noel
      Rainguesson? How many do you believe I climbed, Pierre?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Only eight.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The laughter that followed inflamed the Paladin’s anger to white heat, and
      he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I bide my time—I bide my time. I will reckon with you all, I
      promise you that!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Don’t get him started,” Noel pleaded; “he is a perfect lion when he gets
      started. I saw enough to teach me that, after the third skirmish. After it
      was over I saw him come out of the bushes and attack a dead man
      single-handed.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is another lie; and I give you fair warning that you are going too
      far. You will see me attack a live one if you are not careful.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Meaning me, of course. This wounds me more than any number of injurious
      and unkind speeches could do. In gratitude to one’s benefactor—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Benefactor? What do I owe you, I should like to know?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You owe me your life. I stood between the trees and the foe, and kept
      hundreds and thousands of the enemy at bay when they were thirsting for
      your blood. And I did not do it to display my daring. I did it because I
      loved you and could not live without you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “There—you have said enough! I will not stay here to listen to these
      infamies. I can endure your lies, but not your love. Keep that corruption
      for somebody with a stronger stomach than mine. And I want to say this,
      before I go. That you people’s small performances might appear the better
      and win you the more glory, I hid my own deeds through all the march. I
      went always to the front, where the fighting was thickest, to be remote
      from you in order that you might not see and be discouraged by the things
      I did to the enemy. It was my purpose to keep this a secret in my own
      breast, but you force me to reveal it. If you ask for my witnesses, yonder
      they lie, on the road we have come. I found that road mud, I paved it with
      corpses. I found that country sterile, I fertilized it with blood. Time
      and again I was urged to go to the rear because the command could not
      proceed on account of my dead. And yet you, you miscreant, accuse me of
      climbing trees! Pah!”
     </p>
    <p>
      And he strode out, with a lofty air, for the recital of his imaginary
      deeds had already set him up again and made him feel good.
    </p>
    <p>
      Next day we mounted and faced toward Chinon. Orleans was at our back now,
      and close by, lying in the strangling grip of the English; soon, please
      God, we would face about and go to their relief. From Gien the news had
      spread to Orleans that the peasant Maid of Vaucouleurs was on her way,
      divinely commissioned to raise the siege. The news made a great excitement
      and raised a great hope—the first breath of hope those poor souls
      had breathed in five months. They sent commissioners at once to the King
      to beg him to consider this matter, and not throw this help lightly away.
      These commissioners were already at Chinon by this time.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we were half-way to Chinon we happened upon yet one more squad of
      enemies. They burst suddenly out of the woods, and in considerable force,
      too; but we were not the apprentices we were ten or twelve days before;
      no, we were seasoned to this kind of adventure now; our hearts did not
      jump into our throats and our weapons tremble in our hands. We had learned
      to be always in battle array, always alert, and always ready to deal with
      any emergency that might turn up. We were no more dismayed by the sight of
      those people than our commander was. Before they could form, Joan had
      delivered the order, “Forward!” and we were down upon them with a rush.
      They stood no chance; they turned tail and scattered, we plowing through
      them as if they had been men of straw. That was our last ambuscade, and it
      was probably laid for us by that treacherous rascal, the King’s own
      minister and favorite, De la Tremouille.
    </p>
    <p>
      We housed ourselves in an inn, and soon the town came flocking to get a
      glimpse of the Maid.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, the tedious King and his tedious people! Our two good knights came
      presently, their patience well wearied, and reported. They and we
      reverently stood—as becomes persons who are in the presence of kings
      and the superiors of kings—until Joan, troubled by this mark of
      homage and respect, and not content with it nor yet used to it, although
      we had not permitted ourselves to do otherwise since the day she
      prophesied that wretched traitor’s death and he was straightway drowned,
      thus confirming many previous signs that she was indeed an ambassador
      commissioned of God, commanded us to sit; then the Sieur de Metz said to
      Joan:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The King has got the letter, but they will not let us have speech with
      him.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Who is it that forbids?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “None forbids, but there be three or four that are nearest his person—schemers
      and traitors every one—that put obstructions in the way, and seek
      all ways, by lies and pretexts, to make delay. Chiefest of these are
      Georges de la Tremouille and that plotting fox, the Archbishop of Rheims.
      While they keep the King idle and in bondage to his sports and follies,
      they are great and their importance grows; whereas if ever he assert
      himself and rise and strike for crown and country like a man, their reign
      is done. So they but thrive, they care not if the crown go to destruction
      and the King with it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You have spoken with others besides these?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Not of the Court, no—the Court are the meek slaves of those
      reptiles, and watch their mouths and their actions, acting as they act,
      thinking as they think, saying as they say; wherefore they are cold to us,
      and turn aside and go another way when we appear. But we have spoken with
      the commissioners from Orleans. They said with heat: ‘It is a marvel that
      any man in such desperate case as is the King can moon around in this
      torpid way, and see his all go to ruin without lifting a finger to stay
      the disaster. What a most strange spectacle it is! Here he is, shut up in
      this wee corner of the realm like a rat in a trap; his royal shelter this
      huge gloomy tomb of a castle, with wormy rags for upholstery and crippled
      furniture for use, a very house of desolation; in his treasure forty
      francs, and not a farthing more, God be witness! no army, nor any shadow
      of one; and by contrast with his hungry poverty you behold this crownless
      pauper and his shoals of fools and favorites tricked out in the gaudiest
      silks and velvets you shall find in any Court in Christendom. And look
      you, he knows that when our city falls—as fall it surely will except
      succor come swiftly—France falls; he knows that when that day comes
      he will be an outlaw and a fugitive, and that behind him the English flag
      will float unchallenged over every acre of his great heritage; he knows
      these things, he knows that our faithful city is fighting all solitary and
      alone against disease, starvation, and the sword to stay this awful
      calamity, yet he will not strike one blow to save her, he will not hear
      our prayers, he will not even look upon our faces.’ That is what the
      commissioners said, and they are in despair.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan said, gently:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is pity, but they must not despair. The Dauphin will hear them
      presently. Tell them so.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She almost always called the King the Dauphin. To her mind he was not King
      yet, not being crowned.
    </p>
    <p>
      “We will tell them so, and it will content them, for they believe you come
      from God. The Archbishop and his confederate have for backer that veteran
      soldier Raoul de Gaucourt, Grand Master of the Palace, a worthy man, but
      simply a soldier, with no head for any greater matter. He cannot make out
      to see how a country-girl, ignorant of war, can take a sword in her small
      hand and win victories where the trained generals of France have looked
      for defeats only, for fifty years—and always found them. And so he
      lifts his frosty mustache and scoffs.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “When God fights it is but small matter whether the hand that bears His
      sword is big or little. He will perceive this in time. Is there none in
      that Castle of Chinon who favors us?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, the King’s mother-in-law, Yolande, Queen of Sicily, who is wise and
      good. She spoke with the Sieur Bertrand.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “She favors us, and she hates those others, the King’s beguilers,” said
      Bertrand. “She was full of interest, and asked a thousand questions, all
      of which I answered according to my ability. Then she sat thinking over
      these replies until I thought she was lost in a dream and would wake no
      more. But it was not so. At last she said, slowly, and as if she were
      talking to herself: ‘A child of seventeen—a girl—country-bred—untaught—ignorant
      of war, the use of arms, and the conduct of battles—modest, gentle,
      shrinking—yet throws away her shepherd’s crook and clothes herself
      in steel, and fights her way through a hundred and fifty leagues of fear,
      and comes—she to whom a king must be a dread and awful presence—and
      will stand up before such an one and say, Be not afraid, God has sent me
      to save you! Ah, whence could come a courage and conviction so sublime as
      this but from very God Himself!’ She was silent again awhile, thinking and
      making up her mind; then she said, ‘And whether she comes of God or no,
      there is that in her heart that raises her above men—high above all
      men that breathe in France to-day—for in her is that mysterious
      something that puts heart into soldiers, and turns mobs of cowards into
      armies of fighters that forget what fear is when they are in that presence—fighters
      who go into battle with joy in their eyes and songs on their lips, and
      sweep over the field like a storm—that is the spirit that can save
      France, and that alone, come it whence it may! It is in her, I do truly
      believe, for what else could have borne up that child on that great march,
      and made her despise its dangers and fatigues? The King must see her face
      to face—and shall!’ She dismissed me with those good words, and I
      know her promise will be kept. They will delay her all they can—those
      animals—but she will not fail in the end.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Would she were King!” said the other knight, fervently. “For there is
      little hope that the King himself can be stirred out of his lethargy. He
      is wholly without hope, and is only thinking of throwing away everything
      and flying to some foreign land. The commissioners say there is a spell
      upon him that makes him hopeless—yes, and that it is shut up in a
      mystery which they cannot fathom.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I know the mystery,” said Joan, with quiet confidence; “I know it, and he
      knows it, but no other but God. When I see him I will tell him a secret
      that will drive away his trouble, then he will hold up his head again.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was miserable with curiosity to know what it was that she would tell
      him, but she did not say, and I did not expect she would. She was but a
      child, it is true; but she was not a chatterer to tell great matters and
      make herself important to little people; no, she was reserved, and kept
      things to herself, as the truly great always do.
    </p>
    <p>
      The next day Queen Yolande got one victory over the King’s keepers, for,
      in spite of their protestations and obstructions, she procured an audience
      for our two knights, and they made the most they could out of their
      opportunity. They told the King what a spotless and beautiful character
      Joan was, and how great and noble a spirit animated her, and they implored
      him to trust in her, believe in her, and have faith that she was sent to
      save France. They begged him to consent to see her. He was strongly moved
      to do this, and promised that he would not drop the matter out of his
      mind, but would consult with his council about it. This began to look
      encouraging. Two hours later there was a great stir below, and the
      innkeeper came flying up to say a commission of illustrious ecclesiastics
      was come from the King—from the King his very self, understand!—think
      of this vast honor to his humble little hostelry!—and he was so
      overcome with the glory of it that he could hardly find breath enough in
      his excited body to put the facts into words. They were come from the King
      to speak with the Maid of Vaucouleurs. Then he flew downstairs, and
      presently appeared again, backing into the room, and bowing to the ground
      with every step, in front of four imposing and austere bishops and their
      train of servants.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan rose, and we all stood. The bishops took seats, and for a while no
      word was said, for it was their prerogative to speak first, and they were
      so astonished to see what a child it was that was making such a noise in
      the world and degrading personages of their dignity to the base function
      of ambassadors to her in her plebeian tavern, that they could not find any
      words to say at first. Then presently their spokesman told Joan they were
      aware that she had a message for the King, wherefore she was now commanded
      to put it into words, briefly and without waste of time or embroideries of
      speech.
    </p>
    <p>
      As for me, I could hardly contain my joy—our message was to reach
      the King at last! And there was the same joy and pride and exultation in
      the faces of our knights, too, and in those of Joan’s brothers. And I knew
      that they were all praying—as I was—that the awe which we felt
      in the presence of these great dignitaries, and which would have tied our
      tongues and locked our jaws, would not affect her in the like degree, but
      that she would be enabled to word her message well, and with little
      stumbling, and so make a favorable impression here, where it would be so
      valuable and so important.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, dear, how little we were expecting what happened then! We were aghast
      to hear her say what she said. She was standing in a reverent attitude,
      with her head down and her hands clasped in front of her; for she was
      always reverent toward the consecrated servants of God. When the spokesman
      had finished, she raised her head and set her calm eye on those faces, not
      any more disturbed by their state and grandeur than a princess would have
      been, and said, with all her ordinary simplicity and modesty of voice and
      manner:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ye will forgive me, reverend sirs, but I have no message save for the
      King’s ear alone.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Those surprised men were dumb for a moment, and their faces flushed
      darkly; then the spokesman said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Hark ye, to you fling the King’s command in his face and refuse to
      deliver this message of yours to his servants appointed to receive it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “God has appointed me to receive it, and another’s commandment may not
      take precedence of that. I pray you let me have speech for his grace the
      Dauphin.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Forbear this folly, and come at your message! Deliver it, and waste no
      more time about it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You err indeed, most reverend fathers in God, and it is not well. I am
      not come hither to talk, but to deliver Orleans, and lead the Dauphin to
      his good city of Rheims, and set the crown upon his head.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Is that the message you send to the King?”
     </p>
    <p>
      But Joan only said, in the simple fashion which was her wont:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ye will pardon me for reminding you again—but I have no message to
      send to any one.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The King’s messengers rose in deep anger and swept out of the place
      without further words, we and Joan kneeling as they passed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Our countenances were vacant, our hearts full of a sense of disaster. Our
      precious opportunity was thrown away; we could not understand Joan’s
      conduct, she who had been so wise until this fatal hour. At last the Sieur
      Bertrand found courage to ask her why she had let this great chance to get
      her message to the King go by.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Who sent them here?” she asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      “The King.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Who moved the King to send them?” She waited for an answer; none came,
      for we began to see what was in her mind—so she answered herself:
      “The Dauphin’s council moved him to it. Are they enemies to me and to the
      Dauphin’s weal, or are they friends?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Enemies,” answered the Sieur Bertrand.
    </p>
    <p>
      “If one would have a message go sound and ungarbled, does one choose
      traitors and tricksters to send it by?”
     </p>
    <p>
      I saw that we had been fools, and she wise. They saw it too, so none found
      anything to say. Then she went on:
    </p>
    <p>
      “They had but small wit that contrived this trap. They thought to get my
      message and seem to deliver it straight, yet deftly twist it from its
      purpose. You know that one part of my message is but this—to move
      the Dauphin by argument and reasonings to give me men-at-arms and send me
      to the siege. If an enemy carried these in the right words, the exact
      words, and no word missing, yet left out the persuasions of gesture and
      supplicating tone and beseeching looks that inform the words and make them
      live, where were the value of that argument—whom could it convince?
      Be patient, the Dauphin will hear me presently; have no fear.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Sieur de Metz nodded his head several times, and muttered as to
      himself:
    </p>
    <p>
      “She was right and wise, and we are but dull fools, when all is said.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was just my thought; I could have said it myself; and indeed it was the
      thought of all there present. A sort of awe crept over us, to think how
      that untaught girl, taken suddenly and unprepared, was yet able to
      penetrate the cunning devices of a King’s trained advisers and defeat
      them. Marveling over this, and astonished at it, we fell silent and spoke
      no more. We had come to know that she was great in courage, fortitude,
      endurance, patience, conviction, fidelity to all duties—in all
      things, indeed, that make a good and trusty soldier and perfect him for
      his post; now we were beginning to feel that maybe there were greatnesses
      in her brain that were even greater than these great qualities of the
      heart. It set us thinking.
    </p>
    <p>
      What Joan did that day bore fruit the very day after. The King was obliged
      to respect the spirit of a young girl who could hold her own and stand her
      ground like that, and he asserted himself sufficiently to put his respect
      into an act instead of into polite and empty words. He moved Joan out of
      that poor inn, and housed her, with us her servants, in the Castle of
      Courdray, personally confiding her to the care of Madame de Bellier, wife
      of old Raoul de Gaucourt, Master of the Palace. Of course, this royal
      attention had an immediate result: all the great lords and ladies of the
      Court began to flock there to see and listen to the wonderful girl-soldier
      that all the world was talking about, and who had answered the King’s
      mandate with a bland refusal to obey. Joan charmed them every one with her
      sweetness and simplicity and unconscious eloquence, and all the best and
      capablest among them recognized that there was an indefinable something
      about her that testified that she was not made of common clay, that she
      was built on a grander plan than the mass of mankind, and moved on a
      loftier plane. These spread her fame. She always made friends and
      advocates that way; neither the high nor the low could come within the
      sound of her voice and the sight of her face and go out from her presence
      indifferent.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 6 Joan Convinces the King
    </h3>
    <p>
      WELL, anything to make delay. The King’s council advised him against
      arriving at a decision in our matter too precipitately. He arrive at a
      decision too precipitately! So they sent a committee of priests—always
      priests—into Lorraine to inquire into Joan’s character and history—a
      matter which would consume several weeks, of course. You see how
      fastidious they were. It was as if people should come to put out the fire
      when a man’s house was burning down, and they waited till they could send
      into another country to find out if he had always kept the Sabbath or not,
      before letting him try.
    </p>
    <p>
      So the days poked along; dreary for us young people in some ways, but not
      in all, for we had one great anticipation in front of us; we had never
      seen a king, and now some day we should have that prodigious spectacle to
      see and to treasure in our memories all our lives; so we were on the
      lookout, and always eager and watching for the chance. The others were
      doomed to wait longer than I, as it turned out. One day great news came—the
      Orleans commissioners, with Yolande and our knights, had at last turned
      the council’s position and persuaded the King to see Joan.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan received the immense news gratefully but without losing her head, but
      with us others it was otherwise; we could not eat or sleep or do any
      rational thing for the excitement and the glory of it. During two days our
      pair of noble knights were in distress and trepidation on Joan’s account,
      for the audience was to be at night, and they were afraid that Joan would
      be so paralyzed by the glare of light from the long files of torches, the
      solemn pomps and ceremonies, the great concourse of renowned personages,
      the brilliant costumes, and the other splendors of the Court, that she, a
      simple country-maid, and all unused to such things, would be overcome by
      these terrors and make a piteous failure.
    </p>
    <p>
      No doubt I could have comforted them, but I was not free to speak. Would
      Joan be disturbed by this cheap spectacle, this tinsel show, with its
      small King and his butterfly dukelets?—she who had spoken face to
      face with the princes of heaven, the familiars of God, and seen their
      retinue of angels stretching back into the remoteness of the sky, myriads
      upon myriads, like a measureless fan of light, a glory like the glory of
      the sun streaming from each of those innumerable heads, the massed
      radiance filling the deeps of space with a blinding splendor? I thought
      not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Queen Yolande wanted Joan to make the best possible impression upon the
      King and the Court, so she was strenuous to have her clothed in the
      richest stuffs, wrought upon the princeliest pattern, and set off with
      jewels; but in that she had to be disappointed, of course, Joan not being
      persuadable to it, but begging to be simply and sincerely dressed, as
      became a servant of God, and one sent upon a mission of a serious sort and
      grave political import. So then the gracious Queen imagined and contrived
      that simple and witching costume which I have described to you so many
      times, and which I cannot think of even now in my dull age without being
      moved just as rhythmical and exquisite music moves one; for that was
      music, that dress—that is what it was—music that one saw with
      the eyes and felt in the heart. Yes, she was a poem, she was a dream, she
      was a spirit when she was clothed in that.
    </p>
    <p>
      She kept that raiment always, and wore it several times upon occasions of
      state, and it is preserved to this day in the Treasury of Orleans, with
      two of her swords, and her banner, and other things now sacred because
      they had belonged to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the appointed time the Count of Vendome, a great lord of the court,
      came richly clothed, with his train of servants and assistants, to conduct
      Joan to the King, and the two knights and I went with her, being entitled
      to this privilege by reason of our official positions near her person.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we entered the great audience-hall, there it all was just as I have
      already painted it. Here were ranks of guards in shining armor and with
      polished halberds; two sides of the hall were like flower-gardens for
      variety of color and the magnificence of the costumes; light streamed upon
      these masses of color from two hundred and fifty flambeaux. There was a
      wide free space down the middle of the hall, and at the end of it was a
      throne royally canopied, and upon it sat a crowned and sceptered figure
      nobly clothed and blazing with jewels.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is true that Joan had been hindered and put off a good while, but now
      that she was admitted to an audience at last, she was received with honors
      granted to only the greatest personages. At the entrance door stood four
      heralds in a row, in splendid tabards, with long slender silver trumpets
      at their mouths, with square silken banners depending from them
      embroidered with the arms of France. As Joan and the Count passed by,
      these trumpets gave forth in unison one long rich note, and as we moved
      down the hall under the pictured and gilded vaulting, this was repeated at
      every fifty feet of our progress—six times in all. It made our good
      knights proud and happy, and they held themselves erect, and stiffened
      their stride, and looked fine and soldierly. They were not expecting this
      beautiful and honorable tribute to our little country-maid.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan walked two yards behind the Count, we three walked two yards behind
      Joan. Our solemn march ended when we were as yet some eight or ten steps
      from the throne. The Count made a deep obeisance, pronounced Joan’s name,
      then bowed again and moved to his place among a group of officials near
      the throne. I was devouring the crowned personage with all my eyes, and my
      heart almost stood still with awe.
    </p>
    <p>
      The eyes of all others were fixed upon Joan in a gaze of wonder which was
      half worship, and which seemed to say, “How sweet—how lovely—how
      divine!” All lips were parted and motionless, which was a sure sign that
      those people, who seldom forget themselves, had forgotten themselves now,
      and were not conscious of anything but the one object they were gazing
      upon. They had the look of people who are under the enchantment of a
      vision.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then they presently began to come to life again, rousing themselves out of
      the spell and shaking it off as one drives away little by little a
      clinging drowsiness or intoxication. Now they fixed their attention upon
      Joan with a strong new interest of another sort; they were full of
      curiosity to see what she would do—they having a secret and
      particular reason for this curiosity. So they watched. This is what they
      saw:
    </p>
    <p>
      She made no obeisance, nor even any slight inclination of her head, but
      stood looking toward the throne in silence. That was all there was to see
      at present.
    </p>
    <p>
      I glanced up at De Metz, and was shocked at the paleness of his face. I
      whispered and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “What is it, man, what is it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      His answering whisper was so weak I could hardly catch it:
    </p>
    <p>
      “They have taken advantage of the hint in her letter to play a trick upon
      her! She will err, and they will laugh at her. That is not the King that
      sits there.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then I glanced at Joan. She was still gazing steadfastly toward the
      throne, and I had the curious fancy that even her shoulders and the back
      of her head expressed bewilderment. Now she turned her head slowly, and
      her eye wandered along the lines of standing courtiers till it fell upon a
      young man who was very quietly dressed; then her face lighted joyously,
      and she ran and threw herself at his feet, and clasped his knees,
      exclaiming in that soft melodious voice which was her birthright and was
      now charged with deep and tender feeling:
    </p>
    <p>
      “God of his grace give you long life, O dear and gentle Dauphin!”
     </p>
    <p>
      In his astonishment and exultation De Metz cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “By the shadow of God, it is an amazing thing!” Then he mashed all the
      bones of my hand in his grateful grip, and added, with a proud shake of
      his mane, “Now, what have these painted infidels to say!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Meantime the young person in the plain clothes was saying to Joan:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, you mistake, my child, I am not the King. There he is,” and he
      pointed to the throne.
    </p>
    <p>
      The knight’s face clouded, and he muttered in grief and indignation:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, it is a shame to use her so. But for this lie she had gone through
      safe. I will go and proclaim to all the house what—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Stay where you are!” whispered I and the Sieur Bertrand in a breath, and
      made him stop in his place.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan did not stir from her knees, but still lifted her happy face toward
      the King, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “No, gracious liege, you are he, and none other.”
     </p>
    <p>
      De Metz’s troubles vanished away, and he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Verily, she was not guessing, she knew. Now, how could she know? It is a
      miracle. I am content, and will meddle no more, for I perceive that she is
      equal to her occasions, having that in her head that cannot profitably be
      helped by the vacancy that is in mine.”
     </p>
    <p>
      This interruption of his lost me a remark or two of the other talk;
      however, I caught the King’s next question:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But tell me who you are, and what would you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I am called Joan the Maid, and am sent to say that the King of Heaven
      wills that you be crowned and consecrated in your good city of Rheims, and
      be thereafter Lieutenant of the Lord of Heaven, who is King of France. And
      He willeth also that you set me at my appointed work and give me
      men-at-arms.” After a slight pause she added, her eye lighting at the
      sound of her words, “For then will I raise the siege of Orleans and break
      the English power!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The young monarch’s amused face sobered a little when this martial speech
      fell upon that sick air like a breath blown from embattled camps and
      fields of war, and this trifling smile presently faded wholly away and
      disappeared. He was grave now, and thoughtful. After a little he waved his
      hand lightly, and all the people fell away and left those two by
      themselves in a vacant space. The knights and I moved to the opposite side
      of the hall and stood there. We saw Joan rise at a sign, then she and the
      King talked privately together.
    </p>
    <p>
      All that host had been consumed with curiosity to see what Joan would do.
      Well, they had seen, and now they were full of astonishment to see that
      she had really performed that strange miracle according to the promise in
      her letter; and they were fully as much astonished to find that she was
      not overcome by the pomps and splendors about her, but was even more
      tranquil and at her ease in holding speech with a monarch than ever they
      themselves had been, with all their practice and experience.
    </p>
    <p>
      As for our two knights, they were inflated beyond measure with pride in
      Joan, but nearly dumb, as to speech, they not being able to think out any
      way to account for her managing to carry herself through this imposing
      ordeal without ever a mistake or an awkwardness of any kind to mar the
      grace and credit of her great performance.
    </p>
    <p>
      The talk between Joan and the King was long and earnest, and held in low
      voices. We could not hear, but we had our eyes and could note effects; and
      presently we and all the house noted one effect which was memorable and
      striking, and has been set down in memoirs and histories and in testimony
      at the Process of Rehabilitation by some who witnessed it; for all knew it
      was big with meaning, though none knew what that meaning was at that time,
      of course. For suddenly we saw the King shake off his indolent attitude
      and straighten up like a man, and at the same time look immeasurably
      astonished. It was as if Joan had told him something almost too wonderful
      for belief, and yet of a most uplifting and welcome nature.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was long before we found out the secret of this conversation, but we
      know it now, and all the world knows it. That part of the talk was like
      this—as one may read in all histories. The perplexed King asked Joan
      for a sign. He wanted to believe in her and her mission, and that her
      Voices were supernatural and endowed with knowledge hidden from mortals,
      but how could he do this unless these Voices could prove their claim in
      some absolutely unassailable way? It was then that Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I will give you a sign, and you shall no more doubt. There is a secret
      trouble in your heart which you speak of to none—a doubt which
      wastes away your courage, and makes you dream of throwing all away and
      fleeing from your realm. Within this little while you have been praying,
      in your own breast, that God of his grace would resolve that doubt, even
      if the doing of it must show you that no kingly right is lodged in you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was that that amazed the King, for it was as she had said: his prayer
      was the secret of his own breast, and none but God could know about it. So
      he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The sign is sufficient. I know now that these Voices are of God. They
      have said true in this matter; if they have said more, tell it me—I
      will believe.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “They have resolved that doubt, and I bring their very words, which are
      these: Thou art lawful heir to the King thy father, and true heir of
      France. God has spoken it. Now lift up thy head, and doubt no more, but
      give me men-at-arms and let me get about my work.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Telling him he was of lawful birth was what straightened him up and made a
      man of him for a moment, removing his doubts upon that head and convincing
      him of his royal right; and if any could have hanged his hindering and
      pestiferous council and set him free, he would have answered Joan’s prayer
      and set her in the field. But no, those creatures were only checked, not
      checkmated; they could invent some more delays.
    </p>
    <p>
      We had been made proud by the honors which had so distinguished Joan’s
      entrance into that place—honors restricted to personages of very
      high rank and worth—but that pride was as nothing compared with the
      pride we had in the honor done her upon leaving it. For whereas those
      first honors were shown only to the great, these last, up to this time,
      had been shown only to the royal. The King himself led Joan by the hand
      down the great hall to the door, the glittering multitude standing and
      making reverence as they passed, and the silver trumpets sounding those
      rich notes of theirs. Then he dismissed her with gracious words, bending
      low over her hand and kissing it. Always—from all companies, high or
      low—she went forth richer in honor and esteem than when she came.
    </p>
    <p>
      And the King did another handsome thing by Joan, for he sent us back to
      Courdray Castle torch-lighted and in state, under escort of his own troop—his
      guard of honor—the only soldiers he had; and finely equipped and
      bedizened they were, too, though they hadn’t seen the color of their wages
      since they were children, as a body might say. The wonders which Joan had
      been performing before the King had been carried all around by this time,
      so the road was so packed with people who wanted to get a sight of her
      that we could hardly dig through; and as for talking together, we
      couldn’t, all attempts at talk being drowned in the storm of shoutings and
      huzzas that broke out all along as we passed, and kept abreast of us like
      a wave the whole way.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 7 Our Paladin in His Glory
    </h3>
    <p>
      WE WERE doomed to suffer tedious waits and delays, and we settled
      ourselves down to our fate and bore it with a dreary patience, counting
      the slow hours and the dull days and hoping for a turn when God should
      please to send it. The Paladin was the only exception—that is to
      say, he was the only one who was happy and had no heavy times. This was
      partly owing to the satisfaction he got out of his clothes. He bought them
      at second hand—a Spanish cavalier’s complete suit, wide-brimmed hat
      with flowing plumes, lace collar and cuffs, faded velvet doublet and
      trunks, short cloak hung from the shoulder, funnel-topped buskins, long
      rapier, and all that—a graceful and picturesque costume, and the
      Paladin’s great frame was the right place to hang it for effect. He wore
      it when off duty; and when he swaggered by with one hand resting on the
      hilt of his rapier, and twirling his new mustache with the other,
      everybody stopped to look and admire; and well they might, for he was a
      fine and stately contrast to the small French gentlemen of the day
      squeezed into the trivial French costume of the time.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was king bee of the little village that snuggled under the shelter of
      the frowning towers and bastions of Courdray Castle, and acknowledged lord
      of the tap-room of the inn. When he opened his mouth there, he got a
      hearing. Those simple artisans and peasants listened with deep and
      wondering interest; for he was a traveler and had seen the world—all
      of it that lay between Chinon and Domremy, at any rate—and that was
      a wide stretch more of it than they might ever hope to see; and he had
      been in battle, and knew how to paint its shock and struggle, its perils
      and surprises, with an art that was all his own. He was cock of that walk,
      hero of that hostelry; he drew custom as honey draws flies; so he was the
      pet of the innkeeper, and of his wife and daughter, and they were his
      obliged and willing servants.
    </p>
    <p>
      Most people who have the narrative gift—that great and rare
      endowment—have with it the defect of telling their choice things
      over the same way every time, and this injures them and causes them to
      sound stale and wearisome after several repetitions; but it was not so
      with the Paladin, whose art was of a finer sort; it was more stirring and
      interesting to hear him tell about a battle the tenth time than it was the
      first time, because he did not tell it twice the same way, but always made
      a new battle of it and a better one, with more casualties on the enemy’s
      side each time, and more general wreck and disaster all around, and more
      widows and orphans and suffering in the neighborhood where it happened. He
      could not tell his battles apart himself, except by their names; and by
      the time he had told one of then ten times it had grown so that there
      wasn’t room enough in France for it any more, but was lapping over the
      edges. But up to that point the audience would not allow him to substitute
      a new battle, knowing that the old ones were the best, and sure to improve
      as long as France could hold them; and so, instead of saying to him as
      they would have said to another, “Give us something fresh, we are fatigued
      with that old thing,” they would say, with one voice and with a strong
      interest, “Tell about the surprise at Beaulieu again—tell it three
      or four times!” That is a compliment which few narrative experts have
      heard in their lifetime.
    </p>
    <p>
      At first when the Paladin heard us tell about the glories of the Royal
      Audience he was broken-hearted because he was not taken with us to it;
      next, his talk was full of what he would have done if he had been there;
      and within two days he was telling what he did do when he was there. His
      mill was fairly started, now, and could be trusted to take care of its
      affair. Within three nights afterward all his battles were taking a rest,
      for already his worshipers in the tap-room were so infatuated with the
      great tale of the Royal Audience that they would have nothing else, and so
      besotted with it were they that they would have cried if they could not
      have gotten it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Noel Rainguesson hid himself and heard it, and came and told me, and after
      that we went together to listen, bribing the inn hostess to let us have
      her little private parlor, where we could stand at the wickets in the door
      and see and hear.
    </p>
    <p>
      The tap-room was large, yet had a snug and cozy look, with its inviting
      little tables and chairs scattered irregularly over its red brick floor,
      and its great fire flaming and crackling in the wide chimney. It was a
      comfortable place to be in on such chilly and blustering March nights as
      these, and a goodly company had taken shelter there, and were sipping
      their wine in contentment and gossiping one with another in a neighborly
      way while they waited for the historian. The host, the hostess, and their
      pretty daughter were flying here and there and yonder among the tables and
      doing their best to keep up with the orders. The room was about forty feet
      square, and a space or aisle down the center of it had been kept vacant
      and reserved for the Paladin’s needs. At the end of it was a platform ten
      or twelve feet wide, with a big chair and a small table on it, and three
      steps leading up to it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Among the wine-sippers were many familiar faces: the cobbler, the farrier,
      the blacksmith, the wheelwright, the armorer, the maltster, the weaver,
      the baker, the miller’s man with his dusty coat, and so on; and conscious
      and important, as a matter of course, was the barber-surgeon, for he is
      that in all villages. As he has to pull everybody’s teeth and purge and
      bleed all the grown people once a month to keep their health sound, he
      knows everybody, and by constant contact with all sorts of folk becomes a
      master of etiquette and manners and a conversationalist of large facility.
      There were plenty of carriers, drovers, and their sort, and journeymen
      artisans.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the Paladin presently came sauntering indolently in, he was received
      with a cheer, and the barber hustled forward and greeted him with several
      low and most graceful and courtly bows, also taking his hand and touching
      his lips to it. Then he called in a loud voice for a stoup of wine for the
      Paladin, and when the host’s daughter brought it up on the platform and
      dropped her courtesy and departed, the barber called after her, and told
      her to add the wine to his score. This won him ejaculations of approval,
      which pleased him very much and made his little rat-eyes shine; and such
      applause is right and proper, for when we do a liberal and gallant thing
      it is but natural that we should wish to see notice taken of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      The barber called upon the people to rise and drink the Paladin’s health,
      and they did it with alacrity and affectionate heartiness, clashing their
      metal flagons together with a simultaneous crash, and heightening the
      effect with a resounding cheer. It was a fine thing to see how that young
      swashbuckler had made himself so popular in a strange land in so little a
      while, and without other helps to his advancement than just his tongue and
      the talent to use it given him by God—a talent which was but one
      talent in the beginning, but was now become ten through husbandry and the
      increment and usufruct that do naturally follow that and reward it as by a
      law.
    </p>
    <p>
      The people sat down and began to hammer on the tables with their flagons
      and call for “the King’s Audience!—the King’s Audience!—the
      King’s Audience!” The Paladin stood there in one of his best attitudes,
      with his plumed great hat tipped over to the left, the folds of his short
      cloak drooping from his shoulder, and the one hand resting upon the hilt
      of his rapier and the other lifting his beaker. As the noise died down he
      made a stately sort of a bow, which he had picked up somewhere, then
      fetched his beaker with a sweep to his lips and tilted his head back and
      drained it to the bottom. The barber jumped for it and set it upon the
      Paladin’s table. Then the Paladin began to walk up and down his platform
      with a great deal of dignity and quite at his ease; and as he walked he
      talked, and every little while stopped and stood facing his house and so
      standing continued his talk.
    </p>
    <p>
      We went three nights in succession. It was plain that there was a charm
      about the performance that was apart from the mere interest which attaches
      to lying. It was presently discoverable that this charm lay in the
      Paladin’s sincerity. He was not lying consciously; he believed what he was
      saying. To him, his initial statements were facts, and whenever he
      enlarged a statement, the enlargement became a fact too. He put his heart
      into his extravagant narrative, just as a poet puts his heart into a
      heroic fiction, and his earnestness disarmed criticism—disarmed it
      as far as he himself was concerned. Nobody believed his narrative, but all
      believed that he believed it.
    </p>
    <p>
      He made his enlargements without flourish, without emphasis, and so
      casually that often one failed to notice that a change had been made. He
      spoke of the governor of Vaucouleurs, the first night, simply as the
      governor of Vaucouleurs; he spoke of him the second night as his uncle the
      governor of Vaucouleurs; the third night he was his father. He did not
      seem to know that he was making these extraordinary changes; they dropped
      from his lips in a quite natural and effortless way. By his first night’s
      account the governor merely attached him to the Maid’s military escort in
      a general and unofficial way; the second night his uncle the governor sent
      him with the Maid as lieutenant of her rear guard; the third night his
      father the governor put the whole command, Maid and all, in his special
      charge. The first night the governor spoke of him as a youth without name
      or ancestry, but “destined to achieve both”; the second night his uncle
      the governor spoke of him as the latest and worthiest lineal descendent of
      the chiefest and noblest of the Twelve Paladins of Charlemagne; the third
      night he spoke of him as the lineal descendent of the whole dozen. In
      three nights he promoted the Count of Vendome from a fresh acquaintance to
      a schoolmate, and then brother-in-law.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the King’s Audience everything grew, in the same way. First the four
      silver trumpets were twelve, then thirty-five, finally ninety-six; and by
      that time he had thrown in so many drums and cymbals that he had to
      lengthen the hall from five hundred feet to nine hundred to accommodate
      them. Under his hand the people present multiplied in the same large way.
    </p>
    <p>
      The first two nights he contented himself with merely describing and
      exaggerating the chief dramatic incident of the Audience, but the third
      night he added illustration to description. He throned the barber in his
      own high chair to represent the sham King; then he told how the Court
      watched the Maid with intense interest and suppressed merriment, expecting
      to see her fooled by the deception and get herself swept permanently out
      of credit by the storm of scornful laughter which would follow. He worked
      this scene up till he got his house in a burning fever of excitement and
      anticipation, then came his climax. Turning to the barber, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But mark you what she did. She gazed steadfastly upon that sham’s villain
      face as I now gaze upon yours—this being her noble and simple
      attitude, just as I stand now—then turned she—thus—to
      me, and stretching her arm out—so—and pointing with her
      finger, she said, in that firm, calm tone which she was used to use in
      directing the conduct of a battle, ‘Pluck me this false knave from the
      throne!’ I, striding forward as I do now, took him by the collar and
      lifted him out and held him aloft—thus—as if he had been but a
      child.” (The house rose, shouting, stamping, and banging with their
      flagons, and went fairly mad over this magnificent exhibition of strength—and
      there was not the shadow of a laugh anywhere, though the spectacle of the
      limp but proud barber hanging there in the air like a puppy held by the
      scruff of its neck was a thing that had nothing of solemnity about it.)
      “Then I set him down upon his feet—thus—being minded to get
      him by a better hold and heave him out of the window, but she bid me
      forbear, so by that error he escaped with his life.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Then she turned her about and viewed the throng with those eyes of hers,
      which are the clear-shining windows whence her immortal wisdom looketh out
      upon the world, resolving its falsities and coming at the kernel of truth
      that is hid within them, and presently they fell upon a young man modestly
      clothed, and him she proclaimed for what he truly was, saying, ‘I am thy
      servant—thou art the King!’ Then all were astonished, and a great
      shout went up, the whole six thousand joining in it, so that the walls
      rocked with the volume and the tumult of it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He made a fine and picturesque thing of the march-out from the Audience,
      augmenting the glories of it to the last limit of the impossibilities;
      then he took from his finger and held up a brass nut from a bolt-head
      which the head ostler at the castle had given him that morning, and made
      his conclusion—thus:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Then the King dismissed the Maid most graciously—as indeed was her
      desert—and, turning to me, said, ‘Take this signet-ring, son of the
      Paladins, and command me with it in your day of need; and look you,’ said
      he, touching my temple, ‘preserve this brain, France has use for it; and
      look well to its casket also, for I foresee that it will be hooped with a
      ducal coronet one day.’ I took the ring, and knelt and kissed his hand,
      saying, ‘Sire, where glory calls, there will I be found; where danger and
      death are thickest, that is my native air; when France and the throne need
      help—well, I say nothing, for I am not of the talking sort—let
      my deeds speak for me, it is all I ask.’
    </p>
    <p>
      “So ended the most fortunate and memorable episode, so big with future
      weal for the crown and the nation, and unto God be the thanks! Rise! Fill
      your flagons! Now—to France and the King—drink!”
     </p>
    <p>
      They emptied them to the bottom, then burst into cheers and huzzas, and
      kept it up as much as two minutes, the Paladin standing at stately ease
      the while and smiling benignantly from his platform.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 8 Joan Persuades Her Inquisitors
    </h3>

    <p>
      WHEN JOAN told the King what that deep secret was that was torturing his
      heart, his doubts were cleared away; he believed she was sent of God, and
      if he had been let alone he would have set her upon her great mission at
      once. But he was not let alone. Tremouille and the holy fox of Rheims knew
      their man. All they needed to say was this—and they said it:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Your Highness says her Voices have revealed to you, by her mouth, a
      secret known only to yourself and God. How can you know that her Voices
      are not of Satan, and she his mouthpiece?—for does not Satan know
      the secrets of men and use his knowledge for the destruction of their
      souls? It is a dangerous business, and your Highness will do well not to
      proceed in it without probing the matter to the bottom.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That was enough. It shriveled up the King’s little soul like a raisin,
      with terrors and apprehensions, and straightway he privately appointed a
      commission of bishops to visit and question Joan daily until they should
      find out whether her supernatural helps hailed from heaven or from hell.
    </p>
    <p>
      The King’s relative, the Duke of Alencon, three years prisoner of war to
      the English, was in these days released from captivity through promise of
      a great ransom; and the name and fame of the Maid having reached him—for
      the same filled all mouths now, and penetrated to all parts—he came
      to Chinon to see with his own eyes what manner of creature she might be.
      The King sent for Joan and introduced her to the Duke. She said, in her
      simple fashion:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You are welcome; the more of the blood of France that is joined to this
      cause, the better for the cause and it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then the two talked together, and there was just the usual result: when
      they departed, the Duke was her friend and advocate.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan attended the King’s mass the next day, and afterward dined with the
      King and the Duke. The King was learning to prize her company and value
      her conversation; and that might well be, for, like other kings, he was
      used to getting nothing out of people’s talk but guarded phrases,
      colorless and non-committal, or carefully tinted to tally with the color
      of what he said himself; and so this kind of conversation only vexes and
      bores, and is wearisome; but Joan’s talk was fresh and free, sincere and
      honest, and unmarred by timorous self-watching and constraint. She said
      the very thing that was in her mind, and said it in a plain,
      straightforward way. One can believe that to the King this must have been
      like fresh cold water from the mountains to parched lips used to the water
      of the sun-baked puddles of the plain.
    </p>
    <p>
      After dinner Joan so charmed the Duke with her horsemanship and lance
      practice in the meadows by the Castle of Chinon whither the King also had
      come to look on, that he made her a present of a great black war-steed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Every day the commission of bishops came and questioned Joan about her
      Voices and her mission, and then went to the King with their report. These
      pryings accomplished but little. She told as much as she considered
      advisable, and kept the rest to herself. Both threats and trickeries were
      wasted upon her. She did not care for the threats, and the traps caught
      nothing. She was perfectly frank and childlike about these things. She
      knew the bishops were sent by the King, that their questions were the
      King’s questions, and that by all law and custom a King’s questions must
      be answered; yet she told the King in her naive way at his own table one
      day that she answered only such of those questions as suited her.
    </p>
    <p>
      The bishops finally concluded that they couldn’t tell whether Joan was
      sent by God or not. They were cautious, you see. There were two powerful
      parties at Court; therefore to make a decision either way would infallibly
      embroil them with one of those parties; so it seemed to them wisest to
      roost on the fence and shift the burden to other shoulders. And that is
      what they did. They made final report that Joan’s case was beyond their
      powers, and recommended that it be put into the hands of the learned and
      illustrious doctors of the University of Poitiers. Then they retired from
      the field, leaving behind them this little item of testimony, wrung from
      them by Joan’s wise reticence: they said she was a “gentle and simple
      little shepherdess, very candid, but not given to talking.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was quite true—in their case. But if they could have looked back
      and seen her with us in the happy pastures of Domremy, they would have
      perceived that she had a tongue that could go fast enough when no harm
      could come of her words.
    </p>
    <p>
      So we traveled to Poitiers, to endure there three weeks of tedious delay
      while this poor child was being daily questioned and badgered before a
      great bench of—what? Military experts?—since what she had come
      to apply for was an army and the privilege of leading it to battle against
      the enemies of France. Oh no; it was a great bench of priests and monks—profoundly
      leaned and astute casuists—renowned professors of theology! Instead
      of setting a military commission to find out if this valorous little
      soldier could win victories, they set a company of holy hair-splitters and
      phrase-mongers to work to find out if the soldier was sound in her piety
      and had no doctrinal leaks. The rats were devouring the house, but instead
      of examining the cat’s teeth and claws, they only concerned themselves to
      find out if it was a holy cat. If it was a pious cat, a moral cat, all
      right, never mind about the other capacities, they were of no consequence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan was as sweetly self-possessed and tranquil before this grim tribunal,
      with its robed celebrities, its solemn state and imposing ceremonials, as
      if she were but a spectator and not herself on trial. She sat there,
      solitary on her bench, untroubled, and disconcerted the science of the
      sages with her sublime ignorance—an ignorance which was a fortress;
      arts, wiles, the learning drawn from books, and all like missiles
      rebounded from its unconscious masonry and fell to the ground harmless;
      they could not dislodge the garrison which was within—Joan’s serene
      great heart and spirit, the guards and keepers of her mission.
    </p>
    <p>
      She answered all questions frankly, and she told all the story of her
      visions and of her experiences with the angels and what they said to her;
      and the manner of the telling was so unaffected, and so earnest and
      sincere, and made it all seem so lifelike and real, that even that hard
      practical court forgot itself and sat motionless and mute, listening with
      a charmed and wondering interest to the end. And if you would have other
      testimony than mine, look in the histories and you will find where an
      eyewitness, giving sworn testimony in the Rehabilitation process, says
      that she told that tale “with a noble dignity and simplicity,” and as to
      its effect, says in substance what I have said. Seventeen, she was—seventeen,
      and all alone on her bench by herself; yet was not afraid, but faced that
      great company of erudite doctors of law and theology, and by the help of
      no art learned in the schools, but using only the enchantments which were
      hers by nature, of youth, sincerity, a voice soft and musical, and an
      eloquence whose source was the heart, not the head, she laid that spell
      upon them. Now was not that a beautiful thing to see? If I could, I would
      put it before you just as I saw it; then I know what you would say.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I have told you, she could not read. “One day they harried and pestered
      her with arguments, reasonings, objections, and other windy and wordy
      trivialities, gathered out of the works of this and that and the other
      great theological authority, until at last her patience vanished, and she
      turned upon them sharply and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I don’t know A from B; but I know this: that I am come by command of the
      Lord of Heaven to deliver Orleans from the English power and crown the
      King of Rheims, and the matters ye are puttering over are of no
      consequence!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Necessarily those were trying days for her, and wearing for everybody that
      took part; but her share was the hardest, for she had no holidays, but
      must be always on hand and stay the long hours through, whereas this,
      that, and the other inquisitor could absent himself and rest up from his
      fatigues when he got worn out. And yet she showed no wear, no weariness,
      and but seldom let fly her temper. As a rule she put her day through calm,
      alert, patient, fencing with those veteran masters of scholarly sword-play
      and coming out always without a scratch.
    </p>
    <p>
      One day a Dominican sprung upon her a question which made everybody cock
      up his ears with interest; as for me, I trembled, and said to myself she
      is done this time, poor Joan, for there is no way of answering this. The
      sly Dominican began in this way—in a sort of indolent fashion, as if
      the thing he was about was a matter of no moment:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You assert that God has willed to deliver France from this English
      bondage?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, He has willed it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You wish for men-at-arms, so that you may go to the relief of Orleans, I
      believe?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes—and the sooner the better.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “God is all-powerful, and able to do whatsoever thing He wills to do, is
      it not so?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Most surely. None doubts it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Dominican lifted his head suddenly, and sprung that question I have
      spoken of, with exultation:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Then answer me this. If He has willed to deliver France, and is able to
      do whatsoever He wills, where is the need for men-at-arms?”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a fine stir and commotion when he said that, and a sudden
      thrusting forward of heads and putting up of hands to ears to catch the
      answer; and the Dominican wagged his head with satisfaction, and looked
      about him collecting his applause, for it shone in every face. But Joan
      was not disturbed. There was no note of disquiet in her voice when she
      answered:
    </p>
    <p>
      “He helps who help themselves. The sons of France will fight the battles,
      but He will give the victory!”
     </p>
    <p>
      You could see a light of admiration sweep the house from face to face like
      a ray from the sun. Even the Dominican himself looked pleased, to see his
      master-stroke so neatly parried, and I heard a venerable bishop mutter, in
      the phrasing common to priest and people in that robust time, “By God, the
      child has said true. He willed that Goliath should be slain, and He sent a
      child like this to do it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Another day, when the inquisition had dragged along until everybody looked
      drowsy and tired but Joan, Brother Seguin, professor of theology at the
      University of Poitiers, who was a sour and sarcastic man, fell to plying
      Joan with all sorts of nagging questions in his bastard Limousin French—for
      he was from Limoges. Finally he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “How is it that you understand those angels? What language did they
      speak?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “French.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “In-deed! How pleasant to know that our language is so honored! Good
      French?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes—perfect.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Perfect, eh? Well, certainly you ought to know. It was even better than
      your own, eh?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “As to that, I—I believe I cannot say,” said she, and was going on,
      but stopped. Then she added, almost as if she were saying it to herself,
      “Still, it was an improvement on yours!”
     </p>
    <p>
      I knew there was a chuckle back of her eyes, for all their innocence.
      Everybody shouted. Brother Seguin was nettled, and asked brusquely:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you believe in God?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan answered with an irritating nonchalance:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, well, yes—better than you, it is likely.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Brother Seguin lost his patience, and heaped sarcasm after sarcasm upon
      her, and finally burst out in angry earnest, exclaiming:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Very well, I can tell you this, you whose belief in God is so great: God
      has not willed that any shall believe in you without a sign. Where is your
      sign?—show it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      This roused Joan, and she was on her feet in a moment, and flung out her
      retort with spirit:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have not come to Poitiers to show signs and do miracles. Send me to
      Orleans and you shall have signs enough. Give me men-at-arms—few or
      many—and let me go!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The fire was leaping from her eyes—ah, the heroic little figure!
      can’t you see her? There was a great burst of acclamations, and she sat
      down blushing, for it was not in her delicate nature to like being
      conspicuous.
    </p>
    <p>
      This speech and that episode about the French language scored two points
      against Brother Seguin, while he scored nothing against Joan; yet, sour
      man as he was, he was a manly man, and honest, as you can see by the
      histories; for at the Rehabilitation he could have hidden those unlucky
      incidents if he had chosen, but he didn’t do it, but spoke them right out
      in his evidence.
    </p>
    <p>
      On one of the latter days of that three-weeks session the gowned scholars
      and professors made one grand assault all along the line, fairly
      overwhelming Joan with objections and arguments culled from the writings
      of every ancient and illustrious authority of the Roman Church. She was
      well-nigh smothered; but at last she shook herself free and struck back,
      crying out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Listen! The Book of God is worth more than all these ye cite, and I stand
      upon it. And I tell ye there are things in that Book that not one among ye
      can read, with all your learning!”
     </p>
    <p>
      From the first she was the guest, by invitation, of the dame De Rabateau,
      wife of a councilor of the Parliament of Poitiers; and to that house the
      great ladies of the city came nightly to see Joan and talk with her; and
      not these only, but the old lawyers, councilors and scholars of the
      Parliament and the University. And these grave men, accustomed to weigh
      every strange and questionable thing, and cautiously consider it, and turn
      it about this way and that and still doubt it, came night after night, and
      night after night, falling ever deeper and deeper under the influence of
      that mysterious something, that spell, that elusive and unwordable
      fascination, which was the supremest endowment of Joan of Arc, that
      winning and persuasive and convincing something which high and low alike
      recognized and felt, but which neither high nor low could explain or
      describe, and one by one they all surrendered, saying, “This child is sent
      of God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      All day long Joan, in the great court and subject to its rigid rules of
      procedure, was at a disadvantage; her judges had things their own way; but
      at night she held court herself, and matters were reversed, she presiding,
      with her tongue free and her same judges there before her. There could not
      be but one result: all the objections and hindrances they could build
      around her with their hard labors of the day she would charm away at
      night. In the end, she carried her judges with her in a mass, and got her
      great verdict without a dissenting voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      The court was a sight to see when the president of it read it from his
      throne, for all the great people of the town were there who could get
      admission and find room. First there were some solemn ceremonies, proper
      and usual at such times; then, when there was silence again, the reading
      followed, penetrating the deep hush so that every word was heard in even
      the remotest parts of the house:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is found, and is hereby declared, that Joan of Arc, called the Maid,
      is a good Christian and a good Catholic; that there is nothing in her
      person or her words contrary to the faith; and that the King may and ought
      to accept the succor she offers; for to repel it would be to offend the
      Holy Spirit, and render him unworthy of the air of God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The court rose, and then the storm of plaudits burst forth unrebuked,
      dying down and bursting forth again and again, and I lost sight of Joan,
      for she was swallowed up in a great tide of people who rushed to
      congratulate her and pour out benedictions upon her and upon the cause of
      France, now solemnly and irrevocably delivered into her little hands.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 9 She Is Made General-in-Chief
    </h3>
    <h3>
      IT WAS indeed a great day, and a stirring thing to see.
    </h3>
    <p>
      She had won! It was a mistake of Tremouille and her other ill-wishers to
      let her hold court those nights.
    </p>
    <p>
      The commission of priests sent to Lorraine ostensibly to inquire into
      Joan’s character—in fact to weary her with delays and wear out her
      purpose and make her give it up—arrived back and reported her
      character perfect. Our affairs were in full career now, you see.
    </p>
    <p>
      The verdict made a prodigious stir. Dead France woke suddenly to life,
      wherever the great news traveled. Whereas before, the spiritless and cowed
      people hung their heads and slunk away if one mentioned war to them, now
      they came clamoring to be enlisted under the banner of the Maid of
      Vaucouleurs, and the roaring of war-songs and the thundering of the drums
      filled all the air. I remembered now what she had said, that time there in
      our village when I proved by facts and statistics that France’s case was
      hopeless, and nothing could ever rouse the people from their lethargy:
    </p>
    <p>
      “They will hear the drums—and they will answer, they will march!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It has been said that misfortunes never come one at a time, but in a body.
      In our case it was the same with good luck. Having got a start, it came
      flooding in, tide after tide. Our next wave of it was of this sort. There
      had been grave doubts among the priests as to whether the Church ought to
      permit a female soldier to dress like a man. But now came a verdict on
      that head. Two of the greatest scholars and theologians of the time—one
      of whom had been Chancellor of the University of Paris—rendered it.
      They decided that since Joan “must do the work of a man and a soldier, it
      is just and legitimate that her apparel should conform to the situation.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was a great point gained, the Church’s authority to dress as a man. Oh,
      yes, wave on wave the good luck came sweeping in. Never mind about the
      smaller waves, let us come to the largest one of all, the wave that swept
      us small fry quite off our feet and almost drowned us with joy. The day of
      the great verdict, couriers had been despatched to the King with it, and
      the next morning bright and early the clear notes of a bugle came floating
      to us on the crisp air, and we pricked up our ears and began to count
      them. One—two—three; pause; one—two; pause; one—two—three,
      again—and out we skipped and went flying; for that formula was used
      only when the King’s herald-at-arms would deliver a proclamation to the
      people. As we hurried along, people came racing out of every street and
      house and alley, men, women, and children, all flushed, excited, and
      throwing lacking articles of clothing on as they ran; still those clear
      notes pealed out, and still the rush of people increased till the whole
      town was abroad and streaming along the principal street. At last we
      reached the square, which was now packed with citizens, and there, high on
      the pedestal of the great cross, we saw the herald in his brilliant
      costume, with his servitors about him. The next moment he began his
      delivery in the powerful voice proper to his office:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Know all men, and take heed therefore, that the most high, the most
      illustrious Charles, by the grace of God King of France, hath been pleased
      to confer upon his well-beloved servant Joan of Arc, called the Maid, the
      title, emoluments, authorities, and dignity of General-in-Chief of the
      Armies of France—”
     </p>
    <p>
      Here a thousand caps flew in the air, and the multitude burst into a
      hurricane of cheers that raged and raged till it seemed as if it would
      never come to an end; but at last it did; then the herald went on and
      finished:—“and hath appointed to be her lieutenant and chief of
      staff a prince of his royal house, his grace the Duke of Alencon!”
     </p>
    <p>
      That was the end, and the hurricane began again, and was split up into
      innumerable strips by the blowers of it and wafted through all the lanes
      and streets of the town.
    </p>
    <p>
      General of the Armies of France, with a prince of the blood for
      subordinate! Yesterday she was nothing—to-day she was this.
      Yesterday she was not even a sergeant, not even a corporal, not even a
      private—to-day, with one step, she was at the top. Yesterday she was
      less than nobody to the newest recruit—to-day her command was law to
      La Hire, Saintrailles, the Bastard of Orleans, and all those others,
      veterans of old renown, illustrious masters of the trade of war. These
      were the thoughts I was thinking; I was trying to realize this strange and
      wonderful thing that had happened, you see.
    </p>
    <p>
      My mind went travelling back, and presently lighted upon a picture—a
      picture which was still so new and fresh in my memory that it seemed a
      matter of only yesterday—and indeed its date was no further back
      than the first days of January. This is what it was. A peasant-girl in a
      far-off village, her seventeenth year not yet quite completed, and herself
      and her village as unknown as if they had been on the other side of the
      globe. She had picked up a friendless wanderer somewhere and brought it
      home—a small gray kitten in a forlorn and starving condition—and
      had fed it and comforted it and got its confidence and made it believe in
      her, and now it was curled up in her lap asleep, and she was knitting a
      coarse stocking and thinking—dreaming—about what, one may
      never know. And now—the kitten had hardly had time to become a cat,
      and yet already the girl is General of the Armies of France, with a prince
      of the blood to give orders to, and out of her village obscurity her name
      has climbed up like the sun and is visible from all corners of the land!
      It made me dizzy to think of these things, they were so out of the common
      order, and seemed so impossible.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 10 The Maid’s Sword and Banner
    </h3>
    <p>
      JOAN’S first official act was to dictate a letter to the English
      commanders at Orleans, summoning them to deliver up all strongholds in
      their possession and depart out of France. She must have been thinking it
      all out before and arranging it in her mind, it flowed from her lips so
      smoothly, and framed itself into such vivacious and forcible language.
      Still, it might not have been so; she always had a quick mind and a
      capable tongue, and her faculties were constantly developing in these
      latter weeks. This letter was to be forwarded presently from Blois. Men,
      provisions, and money were offering in plenty now, and Joan appointed
      Blois as a recruiting-station and depot of supplies, and ordered up La
      Hire from the front to take charge.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Great Bastard—him of the ducal house, and governor of Orleans—had
      been clamoring for weeks for Joan to be sent to him, and now came another
      messenger, old D’Aulon, a veteran officer, a trusty man and fine and
      honest. The King kept him, and gave him to Joan to be chief of her
      household, and commanded her to appoint the rest of her people herself,
      making their number and dignity accord with the greatness of her office;
      and at the same time he gave order that they should be properly equipped
      with arms, clothing, and horses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meantime the King was having a complete suit of armor made for her at
      Tours. It was of the finest steel, heavily plated with silver, richly
      ornamented with engraved designs, and polished like a mirror.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s Voices had told her that there was an ancient sword hidden
      somewhere behind the altar of St. Catherine’s at Fierbois, and she sent De
      Metz to get it. The priests knew of no such sword, but a search was made,
      and sure enough it was found in that place, buried a little way under the
      ground. It had no sheath and was very rusty, but the priests polished it
      up and sent it to Tours, whither we were now to come. They also had a
      sheath of crimson velvet made for it, and the people of Tours equipped it
      with another, made of cloth-of-gold. But Joan meant to carry this sword
      always in battle; so she laid the showy sheaths away and got one made of
      leather. It was generally believed that this sword had belonged to
      Charlemagne, but that was only a matter of opinion. I wanted to sharpen
      that old blade, but she said it was not necessary, as she should never
      kill anybody, and should carry it only as a symbol of authority.
    </p>
    <p>
      At Tours she designed her Standard, and a Scotch painter named James Power
      made it. It was of the most delicate white boucassin, with fringes of
      silk. For device it bore the image of God the Father throned in the clouds
      and holding the world in His hand; two angels knelt at His feet,
      presenting lilies; inscription, JESUS, MARIA; on the reverse the crown of
      France supported by two angels.
    </p>
    <p>
      She also caused a smaller standard or pennon to be made, whereon was
      represented an angel offering a lily to the Holy Virgin.
    </p>
    <p>
      Everything was humming there at Tours. Every now and then one heard the
      bray and crash of military music, every little while one heard the
      measured tramp of marching men—squads of recruits leaving for Blois;
      songs and shoutings and huzzas filled the air night and day, the town was
      full of strangers, the streets and inns were thronged, the bustle of
      preparation was everywhere, and everybody carried a glad and cheerful
      face. Around Joan’s headquarters a crowd of people was always massed,
      hoping for a glimpse of the new General, and when they got it, they went
      wild; but they seldom got it, for she was busy planning her campaign,
      receiving reports, giving orders, despatching couriers, and giving what
      odd moments she could spare to the companies of great folk waiting in the
      drawing-rooms. As for us boys, we hardly saw her at all, she was so
      occupied.
    </p>
    <p>
      We were in a mixed state of mind—sometimes hopeful, sometimes not;
      mostly not. She had not appointed her household yet—that was our
      trouble. We knew she was being overrun with applications for places in it,
      and that these applications were backed by great names and weighty
      influence, whereas we had nothing of the sort to recommend us. She could
      fill her humblest places with titled folk—folk whose relationships
      would be a bulwark for her and a valuable support at all times. In these
      circumstances would policy allow her to consider us? We were not as
      cheerful as the rest of the town, but were inclined to be depressed and
      worried. Sometimes we discussed our slim chances and gave them as good an
      appearance as we could. But the very mention of the subject was anguish to
      the Paladin; for whereas we had some little hope, he had none at all. As a
      rule Noel Rainguesson was quite willing to let the dismal matter alone;
      but not when the Paladin was present. Once we were talking the thing over,
      when Noel said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Cheer up, Paladin, I had a dream last night, and you were the only one
      among us that got an appointment. It wasn’t a high one, but it was an
      appointment, anyway—some kind of a lackey or body-servant, or
      something of that kind.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Paladin roused up and looked almost cheerful; for he was a believer in
      dreams, and in anything and everything of a superstitious sort, in fact.
      He said, with a rising hopefulness:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I wish it might come true. Do you think it will come true?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Certainly; I might almost say I know it will, for my dreams hardly ever
      fail.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Noel, I could hug you if that dream could come true, I could, indeed! To
      be servant of the first General of France and have all the world hear of
      it, and the news go back to the village and make those gawks stare that
      always said I wouldn’t ever amount to anything—wouldn’t it be great!
      Do you think it will come true, Noel? Don’t you believe it will?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I do. There’s my hand on it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Noel, if it comes true I’ll never forget you—shake again! I should
      be dressed in a noble livery, and the news would go to the village, and
      those animals would say, ‘Him, lackey to the General-in-Chief, with the
      eyes of the whole world on him, admiring—well, he has shot up into
      the sky now, hasn’t he!”
     </p>
    <p>
      He began to walk the floor and pile castles in the air so fast and so high
      that we could hardly keep up with him. Then all of a sudden all the joy
      went out of his face and misery took its place, and he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, dear, it is all a mistake, it will never come true. I forgot that
      foolish business at Toul. I have kept out of her sight as much as I could,
      all these weeks, hoping she would forget that and forgive it—but I
      know she never will. She can’t, of course. And, after all, I wasn’t to
      blame. I did say she promised to marry me, but they put me up to it and
      persuaded me. I swear they did!” The vast creature was almost crying. Then
      he pulled himself together and said, remorsefully, “It was the only lie
      I’ve ever told, and—”
     </p>
    <p>
      He was drowned out with a chorus of groans and outraged exclamations; and
      before he could begin again, one of D’Aulon’s liveried servants appeared
      and said we were required at headquarters. We rose, and Noel said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There—what did I tell you? I have a presentiment—the spirit
      of prophecy is upon me. She is going to appoint him, and we are to go
      there and do him homage. Come along!”
     </p>
    <p>
      But the Paladin was afraid to go, so we left him.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we presently stood in the presence, in front of a crowd of glittering
      officers of the army, Joan greeted us with a winning smile, and said she
      appointed all of us to places in her household, for she wanted her old
      friends by her. It was a beautiful surprise to have ourselves honored like
      this when she could have had people of birth and consequence instead, but
      we couldn’t find our tongues to say so, she was become so great and so
      high above us now. One at a time we stepped forward and each received his
      warrant from the hand of our chief, D’Aulon. All of us had honorable
      places; the two knights stood highest; then Joan’s two brothers; I was
      first page and secretary, a young gentleman named Raimond was second page;
      Noel was her messenger; she had two heralds, and also a chaplain and
      almoner, whose name was Jean Pasquerel. She had previously appointed a
      maitre d’hotel and a number of domestics. Now she looked around and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But where is the Paladin?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Sieur Bertrand said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “He thought he was not sent for, your Excellency.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now that is not well. Let him be called.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Paladin entered humbly enough. He ventured no farther than just within
      the door. He stopped there, looking embarrassed and afraid. Then Joan
      spoke pleasantly, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I watched you on the road. You began badly, but improved. Of old you were
      a fantastic talker, but there is a man in you, and I will bring it out.”
       It was fine to see the Paladin’s face light up when she said that. “Will
      you follow where I lead?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Into the fire!” he said; and I said to myself, “By the ring of that, I
      think she has turned this braggart into a hero. It is another of her
      miracles, I make no doubt of it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I believe you,” said Joan. “Here—take my banner. You will ride with
      me in every field, and when France is saved, you will give it me back.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He took the banner, which is now the most precious of the memorials that
      remain of Joan of Arc, and his voice was unsteady with emotion when he
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If I ever disgrace this trust, my comrades here will know how to do a
      friend’s office upon my body, and this charge I lay upon them, as knowing
      they will not fail me.”
     </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 11 The War March Is Begun
    </h3>

    <h3>
      NOEL and I went back together—silent at first, and impressed.
    </h3>
    <p>
      Finally Noel came up out of his thinkings and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The first shall be last and the last first—there’s authority for
      this surprise. But at the same time wasn’t it a lofty hoist for our big
      bull!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It truly was; I am not over being stunned yet. It was the greatest place
      in her gift.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, it was. There are many generals, and she can create more; but there
      is only one Standard-Bearer.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “True. It is the most conspicuous place in the army, after her own.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And the most coveted and honorable. Sons of two dukes tried to get it, as
      we know. And of all people in the world, this majestic windmill carries it
      off. Well, isn’t it a gigantic promotion, when you come to look at it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “There’s no doubt about it. It’s a kind of copy of Joan’s own in
      miniature.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I don’t know how to account for it—do you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes—without any trouble at all—that is, I think I do.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Noel was surprised at that, and glanced up quickly, as if to see if I was
      in earnest. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I thought you couldn’t be in earnest, but I see you are. If you can make
      me understand this puzzle, do it. Tell me what the explanation is.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I believe I can. You have noticed that our chief knight says a good many
      wise things and has a thoughtful head on his shoulders. One day, riding
      along, we were talking about Joan’s great talents, and he said, ‘But,
      greatest of all her gifts, she has the seeing eye.’ I said, like an
      unthinking fool, ‘The seeing eye?—I shouldn’t count on that for much—I
      suppose we all have it.’ ‘No,’ he said; ‘very few have it.’ Then he
      explained, and made his meaning clear. He said the common eye sees only
      the outside of things, and judges by that, but the seeing eye pierces
      through and reads the heart and the soul, finding there capacities which
      the outside didn’t indicate or promise, and which the other kind of eye
      couldn’t detect. He said the mightiest military genius must fail and come
      to nothing if it have not the seeing eye—that is to say, if it
      cannot read men and select its subordinates with an infallible judgment.
      It sees as by intuition that this man is good for strategy, that one for
      dash and daredevil assault, the other for patient bulldog persistence, and
      it appoints each to his right place and wins, while the commander without
      the seeing eye would give to each the other’s place and lose. He was right
      about Joan, and I saw it. When she was a child and the tramp came one
      night, her father and all of us took him for a rascal, but she saw the
      honest man through the rags. When I dined with the governor of Vaucouleurs
      so long ago, I saw nothing in our two knights, though I sat with them and
      talked with them two hours; Joan was there five minutes, and neither spoke
      with them nor heard them speak, yet she marked them for men of worth and
      fidelity, and they have confirmed her judgment. Whom has she sent for to
      take charge of this thundering rabble of new recruits at Blois, made up of
      old disbanded Armagnac raiders, unspeakable hellions, every one? Why, she
      has sent for Satan himself—that is to say, La Hire—that
      military hurricane, that godless swashbuckler, that lurid conflagration of
      blasphemy, that Vesuvius of profanity, forever in eruption. Does he know
      how to deal with that mob of roaring devils? Better than any man that
      lives; for he is the head devil of this world his own self, he is the
      match of the whole of them combined, and probably the father of most of
      them. She places him in temporary command until she can get to Blois
      herself—and then! Why, then she will certainly take them in hand
      personally, or I don’t know her as well as I ought to, after all these
      years of intimacy. That will be a sight to see—that fair spirit in
      her white armor, delivering her will to that muck-heap, that rag-pile,
      that abandoned refuse of perdition.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “La Hire!” cried Noel, “our hero of all these years—I do want to see
      that man!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I too. His name stirs me just as it did when I was a little boy.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I want to hear him swear.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Of course, I would rather hear him swear than another man pray. He is the
      frankest man there is, and the naivest. Once when he was rebuked for
      pillaging on his raids, he said it was nothing. Said he, ‘If God the
      Father were a soldier, He would rob.’ I judge he is the right man to take
      temporary charge there at Blois. Joan has cast the seeing eye upon him,
      you see.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Which brings us back to where we started. I have an honest affection for
      the Paladin, and not merely because he is a good fellow, but because he is
      my child—I made him what he is, the windiest blusterer and most
      catholic liar in the kingdom. I’m glad of his luck, but I hadn’t the
      seeing eye. I shouldn’t have chosen him for the most dangerous post in the
      army. I should have placed him in the rear to kill the wounded and violate
      the dead.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Well, we shall see. Joan probably knows what is in him better than we do.
      And I’ll give you another idea. When a person in Joan of Arc’s position
      tells a man he is brave, he believes it; and believing it is enough; in
      fact, to believe yourself brave is to be brave; it is the one only
      essential thing.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now you’ve hit it!” cried Noel. “She’s got the creating mouth as well as
      the seeing eye! Ah, yes, that is the thing. France was cowed and a coward;
      Joan of Arc has spoken, and France is marching, with her head up!”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was summoned now to write a letter from Joan’s dictation. During the
      next day and night our several uniforms were made by the tailors, and our
      new armor provided. We were beautiful to look upon now, whether clothed
      for peace or war. Clothed for peace, in costly stuffs and rich colors, the
      Paladin was a tower dyed with the glories of the sunset; plumed and sashed
      and iron-clad for war, he was a still statelier thing to look at.
    </p>
    <p>
      Orders had been issued for the march toward Blois. It was a clear, sharp,
      beautiful morning. As our showy great company trotted out in column,
      riding two and two, Joan and the Duke of Alencon in the lead, D’Aulon and
      the big standard-bearer next, and so on, we made a handsome spectacle, as
      you may well imagine; and as we plowed through the cheering crowds, with
      Joan bowing her plumed head to left and right and the sun glinting from
      her silver mail, the spectators realized that the curtain was rolling up
      before their eyes upon the first act of a prodigious drama, and their
      rising hopes were expressed in an enthusiasm that increased with each
      moment, until at last one seemed to even physically feel the concussion of
      the huzzas as well as hear them. Far down the street we heard the softened
      strains of wind-blown music, and saw a cloud of lancers moving, the sun
      glowing with a subdued light upon the massed armor, but striking bright
      upon the soaring lance-heads—a vaguely luminous nebula, so to speak,
      with a constellation twinkling above it—and that was our guard of
      honor. It joined us, the procession was complete, the first war-march of
      Joan of Arc was begun, the curtain was up.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 12 Joan Puts Heart in Her Army
    </h3>
    <p>
      WE WERE at Blois three days. Oh, that camp, it is one of the treasures of
      my memory! Order? There was no more order among those brigands than there
      is among the wolves and the hyenas. They went roaring and drinking about,
      whooping, shouting, swearing, and entertaining themselves with all manner
      of rude and riotous horse-play; and the place was full of loud and lewd
      women, and they were no whit behind the men for romps and noise and
      fantastics.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was in the midst of this wild mob that Noel and I had our first glimpse
      of La Hire. He answered to our dearest dreams. He was of great size and of
      martial bearing, he was cased in mail from head to heel, with a bushel of
      swishing plumes on his helmet, and at his side the vast sword of the time.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was on his way to pay his respects in state to Joan, and as he passed
      through the camp he was restoring order, and proclaiming that the Maid had
      come, and he would have no such spectacle as this exposed to the head of
      the army. His way of creating order was his own, not borrowed. He did it
      with his great fists. As he moved along swearing and admonishing, he let
      drive this way, that way, and the other, and wherever his blow landed, a
      man went down.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Damn you!” he said, “staggering and cursing around like this, and the
      Commander-in-Chief in the camp! Straighten up!” and he laid the man flat.
      What his idea of straightening up was, was his own secret.
    </p>
    <p>
      We followed the veteran to headquarters, listening, observing, admiring—yes,
      devouring, you may say, the pet hero of the boys of France from our
      cradles up to that happy day, and their idol and ours. I called to mind
      how Joan had once rebuked the Paladin, there in the pastures of Domremy,
      for uttering lightly those mighty names, La Hire and the Bastard of
      Orleans, and how she said that if she could but be permitted to stand afar
      off and let her eyes rest once upon those great men, she would hold it a
      privilege. They were to her and the other girls just what they were to the
      boys. Well, here was one of them at last—and what was his errand? It
      was hard to realize it, and yet it was true; he was coming to uncover his
      head before her and take her orders.
    </p>
    <p>
      While he was quieting a considerable group of his brigands in his soothing
      way, near headquarters, we stepped on ahead and got a glimpse of Joan’s
      military family, the great chiefs of the army, for they had all arrived
      now. There they were, six officers of wide renown, handsome men in
      beautiful armor, but the Lord High Admiral of France was the handsomest of
      them all and had the most gallant bearing.
    </p>
    <p>
      When La Hire entered, one could see the surprise in his face at Joan’s
      beauty and extreme youth, and one could see, too, by Joan’s glad smile,
      that it made her happy to get sight of this hero of her childhood at last.
      La Hire bowed low, with his helmet in his gauntleted hand, and made a
      bluff but handsome little speech with hardly an oath in it, and one could
      see that those two took to each other on the spot.
    </p>
    <p>
      The visit of ceremony was soon over, and the others went away; but La Hire
      stayed, and he and Joan sat there, and he sipped her wine, and they talked
      and laughed together like old friends. And presently she gave him some
      instructions, in his quality as master of the camp, which made his breath
      stand still. For, to begin with, she said that all those loose women must
      pack out of the place at once, she wouldn’t allow one of them to remain.
      Next, the rough carousing must stop, drinking must be brought within
      proper and strictly defined limits, and discipline must take the place of
      disorder. And finally she climaxed the list of surprises with this—which
      nearly lifted him out of his armor:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Every man who joins my standard must confess before the priest and
      absolve himself from sin; and all accepted recruits must be present at
      divine service twice a day.”
     </p>
    <p>
      La Hire could not say a word for a good part of a minute, then he said, in
      deep dejection:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, sweet child, they were littered in hell, these poor darlings of mine!
      Attend mass? Why, dear heart, they’ll see us both damned first!”
     </p>
    <p>
      And he went on, pouring out a most pathetic stream of arguments and
      blasphemy, which broke Joan all up, and made her laugh as she had not
      laughed since she played in the Domremy pastures. It was good to hear.
    </p>
    <p>
      But she stuck to her point; so the soldier yielded, and said all right, if
      such were the orders he must obey, and would do the best that was in him;
      then he refreshed himself with a lurid explosion of oaths, and said that
      if any man in the camp refused to renounce sin and lead a pious life, he
      would knock his head off. That started Joan off again; she was really
      having a good time, you see. But she would not consent to that form of
      conversions. She said they must be voluntary.
    </p>
    <p>
      La Hire said that that was all right, he wasn’t going to kill the
      voluntary ones, but only the others.
    </p>
    <p>
      No matter, none of them must be killed—Joan couldn’t have it. She
      said that to give a man a chance to volunteer, on pain of death if he
      didn’t, left him more or less trammeled, and she wanted him to be entirely
      free.
    </p>
    <p>
      So the soldier sighed and said he would advertise the mass, but said he
      doubted if there was a man in camp that was any more likely to go to it
      than he was himself. Then there was another surprise for him, for Joan
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But, dear man, you are going!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I? Impossible! Oh, this is lunacy!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, no, it isn’t. You are going to the service—twice a day.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, am I dreaming? Am I drunk—or is my hearing playing me false?
      Why, I would rather go to—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Never mind where. In the morning you are going to begin, and after that
      it will come easy. Now don’t look downhearted like that. Soon you won’t
      mind it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      La Hire tried to cheer up, but he was not able to do it. He sighed like a
      zephyr, and presently said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Well, I’ll do it for you, but before I would do it for another, I swear I—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But don’t swear. Break it off.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Break it off? It is impossible! I beg you to—to—Why—oh,
      my General, it is my native speech!”
     </p>
    <p>
      He begged so hard for grace for his impediment, that Joan left him one
      fragment of it; she said he might swear by his baton, the symbol of his
      generalship.
    </p>
    <p>
      He promised that he would swear only by his baton when in her presence,
      and would try to modify himself elsewhere, but doubted he could manage it,
      now that it was so old and stubborn a habit, and such a solace and support
      to his declining years.
    </p>
    <p>
      That tough old lion went away from there a good deal tamed and civilized—not
      to say softened and sweetened, for perhaps those expressions would hardly
      fit him. Noel and I believed that when he was away from Joan’s influence
      his old aversions would come up so strong in him that he could not master
      them, and so wouldn’t go to mass. But we got up early in the morning to
      see.
    </p>
    <p>
      Satan was converted, you see. Well, the rest followed. Joan rode up and
      down that camp, and wherever that fair young form appeared in its shining
      armor, with that sweet face to grace the vision and perfect it, the rude
      host seemed to think they saw the god of war in person, descended out of
      the clouds; and first they wondered, then they worshiped. After that, she
      could do with them what she would.
    </p>
    <p>
      In three days it was a clean camp and orderly, and those barbarians were
      herding to divine service twice a day like good children. The women were
      gone. La Hire was stunned by these marvels; he could not understand them.
      He went outside the camp when he wanted to swear. He was that sort of a
      man—sinful by nature and habit, but full of superstitious respect
      for holy places.
    </p>
    <p>
      The enthusiasm of the reformed army for Joan, its devotion to her, and the
      hot desire she had aroused in it to be led against the enemy, exceeded any
      manifestations of this sort which La Hire had ever seen before in his long
      career. His admiration of it all, and his wonder over the mystery and
      miracle of it, were beyond his power to put into words. He had held this
      army cheap before, but his pride and confidence in it knew no limits now.
      He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Two or three days ago it was afraid of a hen-roost; one could storm the
      gates of hell with it now.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan and he were inseparable, and a quaint and pleasant contrast they
      made. He was so big, she so little; he was so gray and so far along in his
      pilgrimage of life, she so youthful; his face was so bronzed and scarred,
      hers so fair and pink, so fresh and smooth; she was so gracious, and he so
      stern; she was so pure, so innocent, he such a cyclopedia of sin. In her
      eye was stored all charity and compassion, in his lightnings; when her
      glance fell upon you it seemed to bring benediction and the peace of God,
      but with his it was different, generally.
    </p>
    <p>
      They rode through the camp a dozen times a day, visiting every corner of
      it, observing, inspecting, perfecting; and wherever they appeared the
      enthusiasm broke forth. They rode side by side, he a great figure of brawn
      and muscle, she a little masterwork of roundness and grace; he a fortress
      of rusty iron, she a shining statuette of silver; and when the reformed
      raiders and bandits caught sight of them they spoke out, with affection
      and welcome in their voices, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There they come—Satan and the Page of Christ!”
     </p>
    <p>
      All the three days that we were in Blois, Joan worked earnestly and
      tirelessly to bring La Hire to God—to rescue him from the bondage of
      sin—to breathe into his stormy heart the serenity and peace of
      religion. She urged, she begged, she implored him to pray. He stood out,
      three days of our stay, begging about piteously to be let off—to be
      let off from just that one thing, that impossible thing; he would do
      anything else—anything—command, and he would obey—he
      would go through the fire for her if she said the word—but spare him
      this, only this, for he couldn’t pray, had never prayed, he was ignorant
      of how to frame a prayer, he had no words to put it in.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet—can any believe it?—she carried even that point, she
      won that incredible victory. She made La Hire pray. It shows, I think,
      that nothing was impossible to Joan of Arc. Yes, he stood there before her
      and put up his mailed hands and made a prayer. And it was not borrowed,
      but was his very own; he had none to help him frame it, he made it out of
      his own head—saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Fair Sir God, I pray you to do by La Hire as he would do by you if you
      were La Hire and he were God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then he put on his helmet and marched out of Joan’s tent as satisfied with
      himself as any one might be who had arranged a perplexed and difficult
      business to the content and admiration of all the parties concerned in the
      matter.
    </p>
    <p>
      If I had know that he had been praying, I could have understood why he was
      feeling so superior, but of course I could not know that.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was coming to the tent at that moment, and saw him come out, and saw him
      march away in that large fashion, and indeed it was fine and beautiful to
      see. But when I got to the tent door I stopped and stepped back, grieved
      and shocked, for I heard Joan crying, as I mistakenly thought—crying
      as if she could not contain nor endure the anguish of her soul, crying as
      if she would die. But it was not so, she was laughing—laughing at La
      Hire’s prayer.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was not until six-and-thirty years afterward that I found that out, and
      then—oh, then I only cried when that picture of young care-free
      mirth rose before me out of the blur and mists of that long-vanished time;
      for there had come a day between, when God’s good gift of laughter had
      gone out from me to come again no more in this life.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
(1) This prayer has been stolen many times and by many nations in the
past four hundred and sixty years, but it originated with La Hire, and
the fact is of official record in the National Archives of France. We
have the authority of Michelet for this.—TRANSLATOR
</pre>
    <h3>
      Chapter 13 Checked by the Folly of the Wise
    </h3>
    <p>
      WE MARCHED out in great strength and splendor, and took the road toward
      Orleans. The initial part of Joan’s great dream was realizing itself at
      last. It was the first time that any of us youngsters had ever seen an
      army, and it was a most stately and imposing spectacle to us. It was
      indeed an inspiring sight, that interminable column, stretching away into
      the fading distances, and curving itself in and out of the crookedness of
      the road like a mighty serpent. Joan rode at the head of it with her
      personal staff; then came a body of priests singing the Veni Creator, the
      banner of the Cross rising out of their midst; after these the glinting
      forest of spears. The several divisions were commanded by the great
      Armagnac generals, La Hire, and Marshal de Boussac, the Sire de Retz,
      Florent d’Illiers, and Poton de Saintrailles.
    </p>
    <p>
      Each in his degree was tough, and there were three degrees—tough,
      tougher, toughest—and La Hire was the last by a shade, but only a
      shade. They were just illustrious official brigands, the whole party; and
      by long habits of lawlessness they had lost all acquaintanceship with
      obedience, if they had ever had any.
    </p>
    <p>
      But what was the good of saying that? These independent birds knew no law.
      They seldom obeyed the King; they never obeyed him when it didn’t suit
      them to do it. Would they obey the Maid? In the first place they wouldn’t
      know how to obey her or anybody else, and in the second place it was of
      course not possible for them to take her military character seriously—that
      country-girl of seventeen who had been trained for the complex and
      terrible business of war—how? By tending sheep.
    </p>
    <p>
      They had no idea of obeying her except in cases where their veteran
      military knowledge and experience showed them that the thing she required
      was sound and right when gauged by the regular military standards. Were
      they to blame for this attitude? I should think not. Old war-worn captains
      are hard-headed, practical men. They do not easily believe in the ability
      of ignorant children to plan campaigns and command armies. No general that
      ever lived could have taken Joan seriously (militarily) before she raised
      the siege of Orleans and followed it with the great campaign of the Loire.
    </p>
    <p>
      Did they consider Joan valueless? Far from it. They valued her as the
      fruitful earth values the sun—they fully believed she could produce
      the crop, but that it was in their line of business, not hers, to take it
      off. They had a deep and superstitious reverence for her as being endowed
      with a mysterious supernatural something that was able to do a mighty
      thing which they were powerless to do—blow the breath of life and
      valor into the dead corpses of cowed armies and turn them into heroes.
    </p>
    <p>
      To their minds they were everything with her, but nothing without her. She
      could inspire the soldiers and fit them for battle—but fight the
      battle herself? Oh, nonsense—that was their function. They, the
      generals, would fight the battles, Joan would give the victory. That was
      their idea—an unconscious paraphrase of Joan’s reply to the
      Dominican.
    </p>
    <p>
      So they began by playing a deception upon her. She had a clear idea of how
      she meant to proceed. It was her purpose to march boldly upon Orleans by
      the north bank of the Loire. She gave that order to her generals. They
      said to themselves, “The idea is insane—it is blunder No. 1; it is
      what might have been expected of this child who is ignorant of war.” They
      privately sent the word to the Bastard of Orleans. He also recognized the
      insanity of it—at least he thought he did—and privately
      advised the generals to get around the order in some way.
    </p>
    <p>
      They did it by deceiving Joan. She trusted those people, she was not
      expecting this sort of treatment, and was not on the lookout for it. It
      was a lesson to her; she saw to it that the game was not played a second
      time.
    </p>
    <p>
      Why was Joan’s idea insane, from the generals’ point of view, but not from
      hers? Because her plan was to raise the siege immediately, by fighting,
      while theirs was to besiege the besiegers and starve them out by closing
      their communications—a plan which would require months in the
      consummation.
    </p>
    <p>
      The English had built a fence of strong fortresses called bastilles around
      Orleans—fortresses which closed all the gates of the city but one.
      To the French generals the idea of trying to fight their way past those
      fortresses and lead the army into Orleans was preposterous; they believed
      that the result would be the army’s destruction. One may not doubt that
      their opinion was militarily sound—no, would have been, but for one
      circumstance which they overlooked. That was this: the English soldiers
      were in a demoralized condition of superstitious terror; they had become
      satisfied that the Maid was in league with Satan. By reason of this a good
      deal of their courage had oozed out and vanished. On the other hand, the
      Maid’s soldiers were full of courage, enthusiasm, and zeal.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan could have marched by the English forts. However, it was not to be.
      She had been cheated out of her first chance to strike a heavy blow for
      her country.
    </p>
    <p>
      In camp that night she slept in her armor on the ground. It was a cold
      night, and she was nearly as stiff as her armor itself when we resumed the
      march in the morning, for iron is not good material for a blanket.
      However, her joy in being now so far on her way to the theater of her
      mission was fire enough to warm her, and it soon did it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her enthusiasm and impatience rose higher and higher with every mile of
      progress; but at last we reached Olivet, and down it went, and indignation
      took its place. For she saw the trick that had been played upon her—the
      river lay between us and Orleans.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was for attacking one of the three bastilles that were on our side of
      the river and forcing access to the bridge which it guarded (a project
      which, if successful, would raise the siege instantly), but the
      long-ingrained fear of the English came upon her generals and they
      implored her not to make the attempt. The soldiers wanted to attack, but
      had to suffer disappointment. So we moved on and came to a halt at a point
      opposite Checy, six miles above Orleans.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dunois, Bastard of Orleans, with a body of knights and citizens, came up
      from the city to welcome Joan. Joan was still burning with resentment over
      the trick that had been put upon her, and was not in the mood for soft
      speeches, even to revered military idols of her childhood. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Are you the bastard?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, I am he, and am right glad of your coming.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And did you advise that I be brought by this side of the river instead of
      straight to Talbot and the English?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Her high manner abashed him, and he was not able to answer with anything
      like a confident promptness, but with many hesitations and partial excuses
      he managed to get out the confession that for what he and the council had
      regarded as imperative military reasons they so advised.
    </p>
    <p>
      “In God’s name,” said Joan, “my Lord’s counsel is safer and wiser than
      yours. You thought to deceive me, but you have deceived yourselves, for I
      bring you the best help that ever knight or city had; for it is God’s
      help, not sent for love of me, but by God’s pleasure. At the prayer of St.
      Louis and St. Charlemagne He has had pity on Orleans, and will not suffer
      the enemy to have both the Duke of Orleans and his city. The provisions to
      save the starving people are here, the boats are below the city, the wind
      is contrary, they cannot come up hither. Now then, tell me, in God’s name,
      you who are so wise, what that council of yours was thinking about, to
      invent this foolish difficulty.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Dunois and the rest fumbled around the matter a moment, then gave in and
      conceded that a blunder had been made.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, a blunder has been made,” said Joan, “and except God take your
      proper work upon Himself and change the wind and correct your blunder for
      you, there is none else that can devise a remedy.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Some of these people began to perceive that with all her technical
      ignorance she had practical good sense, and that with all her native
      sweetness and charm she was not the right kind of a person to play with.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently God did take the blunder in hand, and by His grace the wind did
      change. So the fleet of boats came up and went away loaded with provisions
      and cattle, and conveyed that welcome succor to the hungry city, managing
      the matter successfully under protection of a sortie from the walls
      against the bastille of St. Loup. Then Joan began on the Bastard again:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You see here the army?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is here on this side by advice of your council?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now, in God’s name, can that wise council explain why it is better to
      have it here than it would be to have it in the bottom of the sea?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Dunois made some wandering attempts to explain the inexplicable and excuse
      the inexcusable, but Joan cut him short and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Answer me this, good sir—has the army any value on this side of the
      river?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Bastard confessed that it hadn’t—that is, in view of the plan of
      campaign which she had devised and decreed.
    </p>
    <p>
      “And yet, knowing this, you had the hardihood to disobey my orders. Since
      the army’s place is on the other side, will you explain to me how it is to
      get there?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The whole size of the needless muddle was apparent. Evasions were of no
      use; therefore Dunois admitted that there was no way to correct the
      blunder but to send the army all the way back to Blois, and let it begin
      over again and come up on the other side this time, according to Joan’s
      original plan.
    </p>
    <p>
      Any other girl, after winning such a triumph as this over a veteran
      soldier of old renown, might have exulted a little and been excusable for
      it, but Joan showed no disposition of this sort. She dropped a word or two
      of grief over the precious time that must be lost, then began at once to
      issue commands for the march back. She sorrowed to see her army go; for
      she said its heart was great and its enthusiasm high, and that with it at
      her back she did not fear to face all the might of England.
    </p>
    <p>
      All arrangements having been completed for the return of the main body of
      the army, she took the Bastard and La Hire and a thousand men and went
      down to Orleans, where all the town was in a fever of impatience to have
      sight of her face. It was eight in the evening when she and the troops
      rode in at the Burgundy gate, with the Paladin preceding her with her
      standard. She was riding a white horse, and she carried in her hand the
      sacred sword of Fierbois. You should have seen Orleans then. What a
      picture it was! Such black seas of people, such a starry firmament of
      torches, such roaring whirlwinds of welcome, such booming of bells and
      thundering of cannon! It was as if the world was come to an end.
      Everywhere in the glare of the torches one saw rank upon rank of upturned
      white faces, the mouths wide open, shouting, and the unchecked tears
      running down; Joan forged her slow way through the solid masses, her
      mailed form projecting above the pavement of heads like a silver statue.
      The people about her struggled along, gazing up at her through their tears
      with the rapt look of men and women who believe they are seeing one who is
      divine; and always her feet were being kissed by grateful folk, and such
      as failed of that privilege touched her horse and then kissed their
      fingers.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nothing that Joan did escaped notice; everything she did was commented
      upon and applauded. You could hear the remarks going all the time.
    </p>
    <p>
      “There—she’s smiling—see!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now she’s taking her little plumed cap off to somebody—ah, it’s
      fine and graceful!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “She’s patting that woman on the head with her gauntlet.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, she was born on a horse—see her turn in her saddle, and kiss
      the hilt of her sword to the ladies in the window that threw the flowers
      down.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now there’s a poor woman lifting up a child—she’s kissed it—oh,
      she’s divine!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What a dainty little figure it is, and what a lovely face—and such
      color and animation!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s slender long banner streaming backward had an accident—the
      fringe caught fire from a torch. She leaned forward and crushed the flame
      in her hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      “She’s not afraid of fire nor anything!” they shouted, and delivered a
      storm of admiring applause that made everything quake.
    </p>
    <p>
      She rode to the cathedral and gave thanks to God, and the people crammed
      the place and added their devotions to hers; then she took up her march
      again and picked her slow way through the crowds and the wilderness of
      torches to the house of Jacques Boucher, treasurer of the Duke of Orleans,
      where she was to be the guest of his wife as long as she stayed in the
      city, and have his young daughter for comrade and room-mate. The delirium
      of the people went on the rest of the night, and with it the clamor of the
      joy-bells and the welcoming cannon.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan of Arc had stepped upon her stage at last, and was ready to begin.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 14 What the English Answered
    </h3>

    <p>
      SHE WAS ready, but must sit down and wait until there was an army to work
      with.
    </p>
    <p>
      Next morning, Saturday, April 30, 1429, she set about inquiring after the
      messenger who carried her proclamation to the English from Blois—the
      one which she had dictated at Poitiers. Here is a copy of it. It is a
      remarkable document, for several reasons: for its matter-of-fact
      directness, for its high spirit and forcible diction, and for its naive
      confidence in her ability to achieve the prodigious task which she had
      laid upon herself, or which had been laid upon her—which you please.
      All through it you seem to see the pomps of war and hear the rumbling of
      the drums. In it Joan’s warrior soul is revealed, and for the moment the
      soft little shepherdess has disappeared from your view. This untaught
      country-damsel, unused to dictating anything at all to anybody, much less
      documents of state to kings and generals, poured out this procession of
      vigorous sentences as fluently as if this sort of work had been her trade
      from childhood:
    </p>
    <p>
      JESUS MARIA King of England and you Duke of Bedford who call yourself
      Regent of France; William de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk; and you Thomas Lord
      Scales, who style yourselves lieutenants of the said Bedford—do
      right to the King of Heaven. Render to the Maid who is sent by God the
      keys of all the good towns you have taken and violated in France. She is
      sent hither by God, to restore the blood royal. She is very ready to make
      peace if you will do her right by giving up France and paying for what you
      have held. And you archers, companions of war, noble and otherwise, who
      are before the good city of Orleans, begone into your own land in God’s
      name, or expect news from the Maid who will shortly go to see you to your
      very great hurt. King of England, if you do not so, I am chief of war, and
      whenever I shall find your people in France, I will drive them out,
      willing or not willing; and if they do not obey I will slay them all, but
      if they obey, I will have them to mercy. I am come hither by God, the King
      of Heaven, body for body, to put you out of France, in spite of those who
      would work treason and mischief against the kingdom. Think not you shall
      ever hold the kingdom from the King of Heaven, the Son of the Blessed
      Mary; King Charles shall hold it, for God wills it so, and has revealed it
      to him by the Maid. If you believe not the news sent by God through the
      Maid, wherever we shall meet you we will strike boldly and make such a
      noise as has not been in France these thousand years. Be sure that God can
      send more strength to the Maid than you can bring to any assault against
      her and her good men-at-arms; and then we shall see who has the better
      right, the King of Heaven, or you. Duke of Bedford, the Maid prays you not
      to bring about your own destruction. If you do her right, you may yet go
      in her company where the French shall do the finest deed that has been
      done in Christendom, and if you do not, you shall be reminded shortly of
      your great wrongs.
    </p>
    <p>
      In that closing sentence she invites them to go on crusade with her to
      rescue the Holy Sepulcher. No answer had been returned to this
      proclamation, and the messenger himself had not come back.
    </p>
    <p>
      So now she sent her two heralds with a new letter warning the English to
      raise the siege and requiring them to restore that missing messenger. The
      heralds came back without him. All they brought was notice from the
      English to Joan that they would presently catch her and burn her if she
      did not clear out now while she had a chance, and “go back to her proper
      trade of minding cows.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She held her peace, only saying it was a pity that the English would
      persist in inviting present disaster and eventual destruction when she was
      “doing all she could to get them out of the country with their lives still
      in their bodies.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Presently she thought of an arrangement that might be acceptable, and said
      to the heralds, “Go back and say to Lord Talbot this, from me: ‘Come out
      of your bastilles with your host, and I will come with mine; if I beat
      you, go in peace out of France; if you beat me, burn me, according to your
      desire.’”
     </p>
    <p>
      I did not hear this, but Dunois did, and spoke of it. The challenge was
      refused.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sunday morning her Voices or some instinct gave her a warning, and she
      sent Dunois to Blois to take command of the army and hurry it to Orleans.
      It was a wise move, for he found Regnault de Chartres and some more of the
      King’s pet rascals there trying their best to disperse the army, and
      crippling all the efforts of Joan’s generals to head it for Orleans. They
      were a fine lot, those miscreants. They turned their attention to Dunois
      now, but he had balked Joan once, with unpleasant results to himself, and
      was not minded to meddle in that way again. He soon had the army moving.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 15 My Exquisite Poem Goes to Smash
    </h3>
    <p>
      WE OF the personal staff were in fairyland now, during the few days that
      we waited for the return of the army. We went into society. To our two
      knights this was not a novelty, but to us young villagers it was a new and
      wonderful life. Any position of any sort near the person of the Maid of
      Vaucouleurs conferred high distinction upon the holder and caused his
      society to be courted; and so the D’Arc brothers, and Noel, and the
      Paladin, humble peasants at home, were gentlemen here, personages of
      weight and influence. It was fine to see how soon their country
      diffidences and awkwardnesses melted away under this pleasant sun of
      deference and disappeared, and how lightly and easily they took to their
      new atmosphere. The Paladin was as happy as it was possible for any one in
      this earth to be. His tongue went all the time, and daily he got new
      delight out of hearing himself talk. He began to enlarge his ancestry and
      spread it out all around, and ennoble it right and left, and it was not
      long until it consisted almost entirely of dukes. He worked up his old
      battles and tricked them out with fresh splendors; also with new terrors,
      for he added artillery now. We had seen cannon for the first time at Blois—a
      few pieces—here there was plenty of it, and now and then we had the
      impressive spectacle of a huge English bastille hidden from sight in a
      mountain of smoke from its own guns, with lances of red flame darting
      through it; and this grand picture, along with the quaking thunders
      pounding away in the heart of it, inflamed the Paladin’s imagination and
      enabled him to dress out those ambuscade-skirmishes of ours with a
      sublimity which made it impossible for any to recognize them at all except
      people who had not been there.
    </p>
    <p>
      You may suspect that there was a special inspiration for these great
      efforts of the Paladin’s, and there was. It was the daughter of the house,
      Catherine Boucher, who was eighteen, and gentle and lovely in her ways,
      and very beautiful. I think she might have been as beautiful as Joan
      herself, if she had had Joan’s eyes. But that could never be. There was
      never but that one pair, there will never be another. Joan’s eyes were
      deep and rich and wonderful beyond anything merely earthly. They spoke all
      the languages—they had no need of words. They produced all effects—and
      just by a glance, just a single glance; a glance that could convict a liar
      of his lie and make him confess it; that could bring down a proud man’s
      pride and make him humble; that could put courage into a coward and strike
      dead the courage of the bravest; that could appease resentments and real
      hatreds; that could make the doubter believe and the hopeless hope again;
      that could purify the impure mind; that could persuade—ah, there it
      is—persuasion! that is the word; what or who is it that it couldn’t
      persuade? The maniac of Domremy—the fairy-banishing priest—the
      reverend tribunal of Toul—the doubting and superstitious Laxart—the
      obstinate veteran of Vaucouleurs—the characterless heir of France—the
      sages and scholars of the Parliament and University of Poitiers—the
      darling of Satan, La Hire—the masterless Bastard of Orleans,
      accustomed to acknowledge no way as right and rational but his own—these
      were the trophies of that great gift that made her the wonder and mystery
      that she was.
    </p>
    <p>
      We mingled companionably with the great folk who flocked to the big house
      to make Joan’s acquaintance, and they made much of us and we lived in the
      clouds, so to speak. But what we preferred even to this happiness was the
      quieter occasions, when the formal guests were gone and the family and a
      few dozen of its familiar friends were gathered together for a social good
      time. It was then that we did our best, we five youngsters, with such
      fascinations as we had, and the chief object of them was Catherine. None
      of us had ever been in love before, and now we had the misfortune to all
      fall in love with the same person at the same time—which was the
      first moment we saw her. She was a merry heart, and full of life, and I
      still remember tenderly those few evenings that I was permitted to have my
      share of her dear society and of comradeship with that little company of
      charming people.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Paladin made us all jealous the first night, for when he got fairly
      started on those battles of his he had everything to himself, and there
      was no use in anybody else’s trying to get any attention. Those people had
      been living in the midst of real war for seven months; and to hear this
      windy giant lay out his imaginary campaigns and fairly swim in blood and
      spatter it all around, entertained them to the verge of the grave.
      Catherine was like to die, for pure enjoyment. She didn’t laugh loud—we,
      of course, wished she would—but kept in the shelter of a fan, and
      shook until there was danger that she would unhitch her ribs from her
      spine. Then when the Paladin had got done with a battle and we began to
      feel thankful and hope for a change, she would speak up in a way that was
      so sweet and persuasive that it rankled in me, and ask him about some
      detail or other in the early part of his battle which she said had greatly
      interested her, and would he be so good as to describe that part again and
      with a little more particularity?—which of course precipitated the
      whole battle on us, again, with a hundred lies added that had been
      overlooked before.
    </p>
    <p>
      I do not know how to make you realize the pain I suffered. I had never
      been jealous before, and it seemed intolerable that this creature should
      have this good fortune which he was so ill entitled to, and I have to sit
      and see myself neglected when I was so longing for the least little
      attention out of the thousand that this beloved girl was lavishing on him.
      I was near her, and tried two or three times to get started on some of the
      things that I had done in those battles—and I felt ashamed of
      myself, too, for stooping to such a business—but she cared for
      nothing but his battles, and could not be got to listen; and presently
      when one of my attempts caused her to lose some precious rag or other of
      his mendacities and she asked him to repeat, thus bringing on a new
      engagement, of course, and increasing the havoc and carnage tenfold, I
      felt so humiliated by this pitiful miscarriage of mine that I gave up and
      tried no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      The others were as outraged by the Paladin’s selfish conduct as I was—and
      by his grand luck, too, of course—perhaps, indeed, that was the main
      hurt. We talked our trouble over together, which was natural, for rivals
      become brothers when a common affliction assails them and a common enemy
      bears off the victory.
    </p>
    <p>
      Each of us could do things that would please and get notice if it were not
      for this person, who occupied all the time and gave others no chance. I
      had made a poem, taking a whole night to it—a poem in which I most
      happily and delicately celebrated that sweet girl’s charms, without
      mentioning her name, but any one could see who was meant; for the bare
      title—“The Rose of Orleans”—would reveal that, as it seemed to
      me. It pictured this pure and dainty white rose as growing up out of the
      rude soil of war and looking abroad out of its tender eyes upon the horrid
      machinery of death, and then—note this conceit—it blushes for
      the sinful nature of man, and turns red in a single night. Becomes a red
      rose, you see—a rose that was white before. The idea was my own, and
      quite new. Then it sent its sweet perfume out over the embattled city, and
      when the beleaguering forces smelt it they laid down their arms and wept.
      This was also my own idea, and new. That closed that part of the poem;
      then I put her into the similitude of the firmament—not the whole of
      it, but only part. That is to say, she was the moon, and all the
      constellations were following her about, their hearts in flames for love
      of her, but she would not halt, she would not listen, for ’twas thought
      she loved another. ’Twas thought she loved a poor unworthy suppliant who
      was upon the earth, facing danger, death, and possible mutilation in the
      bloody field, waging relentless war against a heartless foe to save her
      from an all too early grave, and her city from destruction. And when the
      sad pursuing constellations came to know and realize the bitter sorrow
      that was come upon them—note this idea—their hearts broke and
      their tears gushed forth, filling the vault of heaven with a fiery
      splendor, for those tears were falling stars. It was a rash idea, but
      beautiful; beautiful and pathetic; wonderfully pathetic, the way I had it,
      with the rhyme and all to help. At the end of each verse there was a
      two-line refrain pitying the poor earthly lover separated so far, and
      perhaps forever, from her he loved so well, and growing always paler and
      weaker and thinner in his agony as he neared the cruel grave—the
      most touching thing—even the boys themselves could hardly keep back
      their tears, the way Noel said those lines. There were eight four-line
      stanzas in the first end of the poem—the end about the rose, the
      horticultural end, as you may say, if that is not too large a name for
      such a little poem—and eight in the astronomical end—sixteen
      stanzas altogether, and I could have made it a hundred and fifty if I had
      wanted to, I was so inspired and so all swelled up with beautiful thoughts
      and fancies; but that would have been too many to sing or recite before a
      company that way, whereas sixteen was just right, and could be done over
      again if desired. The boys were amazed that I could make such a poem as
      that out of my own head, and so was I, of course, it being as much a
      surprise to me as it could be to anybody, for I did not know that it was
      in me. If any had asked me a single day before if it was in me, I should
      have told them frankly no, it was not.
    </p>
    <p>
      That is the way with us; we may go on half of our life not knowing such a
      thing is in us, when in reality it was there all the time, and all we
      needed was something to turn up that would call for it. Indeed, it was
      always so without family. My grandfather had a cancer, and they never knew
      what was the matter with him till he died, and he didn’t know himself. It
      is wonderful how gifts and diseases can be concealed in that way. All that
      was necessary in my case was for this lovely and inspiring girl to cross
      my path, and out came the poem, and no more trouble to me to word it and
      rhyme it and perfect it than it is to stone a dog. No, I should have said
      it was not in me; but it was.
    </p>
    <p>
      The boys couldn’t say enough about it, they were so charmed and
      astonished. The thing that pleased them the most was the way it would do
      the Paladin’s business for him. They forgot everything in their anxiety to
      get him shelved and silenced. Noel Rainguesson was clear beside himself
      with admiration of the poem, and wished he could do such a thing, but it
      was out of his line, and he couldn’t, of course. He had it by heart in
      half an hour, and there was never anything so pathetic and beautiful as
      the way he recited it. For that was just his gift—that and mimicry.
      He could recite anything better than anybody in the world, and he could
      take of La Hire to the very life—or anybody else, for that matter.
      Now I never could recite worth a farthing; and when I tried with this poem
      the boys wouldn’t let me finish; they would have nobody but Noel. So then,
      as I wanted the poem to make the best possible impression on Catherine and
      the company, I told Noel he might do the reciting. Never was anybody so
      delighted. He could hardly believe that I was in earnest, but I was. I
      said that to have them know that I was the author of it would be enough
      for me. The boys were full of exultation, and Noel said if he could just
      get one chance at those people it would be all he would ask; he would make
      them realize that there was something higher and finer than war-lies to be
      had here.
    </p>
    <p>
      But how to get the opportunity—that was the difficulty. We invented
      several schemes that promised fairly, and at last we hit upon one that was
      sure. That was, to let the Paladin get a good start in a manufactured
      battle, and then send in a false call for him, and as soon as he was out
      of the room, have Noel take his place and finish the battle himself in the
      Paladin’s own style, imitated to a shade. That would get great applause,
      and win the house’s favor and put it in the right mood to hear the poem.
      The two triumphs together with finish the Standard-Bearer—modify
      him, anyway, to a certainty, and give the rest of us a chance for the
      future.
    </p>
    <p>
      So the next night I kept out of the way until the Paladin had got his
      start and was sweeping down upon the enemy like a whirlwind at the head of
      his corps, then I stepped within the door in my official uniform and
      announced that a messenger from General La Hire’s quarters desired speech
      with the Standard-Bearer. He left the room, and Noel took his place and
      said that the interruption was to be deplored, but that fortunately he was
      personally acquainted with the details of the battle himself, and if
      permitted would be glad to state them to the company. Then without waiting
      for the permission he turned himself to the Paladin—a dwarfed
      Paladin, of course—with manner, tones, gestures, attitudes,
      everything exact, and went right on with the battle, and it would be
      impossible to imagine a more perfectly and minutely ridiculous imitation
      than he furnished to those shrieking people. They went into spasms,
      convulsions, frenzies of laughter, and the tears flowed down their cheeks
      in rivulets. The more they laughed, the more inspired Noel grew with his
      theme and the greater marvels he worked, till really the laughter was not
      properly laughing any more, but screaming. Blessedest feature of all,
      Catherine Boucher was dying with ecstasies, and presently there was little
      left of her but gasps and suffocations. Victory? It was a perfect
      Agincourt.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Paladin was gone only a couple of minutes; he found out at once that a
      trick had been played on him, so he came back. When he approached the door
      he heard Noel ranting in there and recognized the state of the case; so he
      remained near the door but out of sight, and heard the performance through
      to the end. The applause Noel got when he finished was wonderful; and they
      kept it up and kept it up, clapping their hands like mad, and shouting to
      him to do it over again.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Noel was clever. He knew the very best background for a poem of deep
      and refined sentiment and pathetic melancholy was one where great and
      satisfying merriment had prepared the spirit for the powerful contrast.
    </p>
    <p>
      So he paused until all was quiet, then his face grew grave and assumed an
      impressive aspect, and at once all faces sobered in sympathy and took on a
      look of wondering and expectant interest. Now he began in a low but
      distinct voice the opening verses of The Rose. As he breathed the rhythmic
      measures forth, and one gracious line after another fell upon those
      enchanted ears in that deep hush, one could catch, on every hand,
      half-audible ejaculations of “How lovely—how beautiful—how
      exquisite!”
     </p>
    <p>
      By this time the Paladin, who had gone away for a moment with the opening
      of the poem, was back again, and had stepped within the door. He stood
      there now, resting his great frame against the wall and gazing toward the
      reciter like one entranced. When Noel got to the second part, and that
      heart-breaking refrain began to melt and move all listeners, the Paladin
      began to wipe away tears with the back of first one hand and then the
      other. The next time the refrain was repeated he got to snuffling, and
      sort of half sobbing, and went to wiping his eyes with the sleeves of his
      doublet. He was so conspicuous that he embarrassed Noel a little, and also
      had an ill effect upon the audience. With the next repetition he broke
      quite down and began to cry like a calf, which ruined all the effect and
      started many to the audience to laughing. Then he went on from bad to
      worse, until I never saw such a spectacle; for he fetched out a towel from
      under his doublet and began to swab his eyes with it and let go the most
      infernal bellowings mixed up with sobbings and groanings and retchings and
      barkings and coughings and snortings and screamings and howlings—and
      he twisted himself about on his heels and squirmed this way and that,
      still pouring out that brutal clamor and flourishing his towel in the air
      and swabbing again and wringing it out. Hear? You couldn’t hear yourself
      think. Noel was wholly drowned out and silenced, and those people were
      laughing the very lungs out of themselves. It was the most degrading sight
      that ever was. Now I heard the clankety-clank that plate-armor makes when
      the man that is in it is running, and then alongside my head there burst
      out the most inhuman explosion of laughter that ever rent the drum of a
      person’s ear, and I looked, and it was La Hire; and the stood there with
      his gauntlets on his hips and his head tilted back and his jaws spread to
      that degree to let out his hurricanes and his thunders that it amounted to
      indecent exposure, for you could see everything that was in him. Only one
      thing more and worse could happen, and it happened: at the other door I
      saw the flurry and bustle and bowings and scrapings of officials and
      flunkeys which means that some great personage is coming—then Joan
      of Arc stepped in, and the house rose! Yes, and tried to shut its
      indecorous mouth and make itself grave and proper; but when it saw the
      Maid herself go to laughing, it thanked God for this mercy and the
      earthquake that followed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Such things make a life of bitterness, and I do not wish to dwell upon
      them. The effect of the poem was spoiled.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 16 The Finding of the Dwarf
    </h3>
    <p>
      THIS EPISODE disagreed with me and I was not able to leave my bed the next
      day. The others were in the same condition. But for this, one or another
      of us might have had the good luck that fell to the Paladin’s share that
      day; but it is observable that God in His compassion sends the good luck
      to such as are ill equipped with gifts, as compensation for their defect,
      but requires such as are more fortunately endowed to get by labor and
      talent what those others get by chance. It was Noel who said this, and it
      seemed to me to be well and justly thought.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Paladin, going about the town all the day in order to be followed and
      admired and overhear the people say in an awed voice, “‘Ssh!—look,
      it is the Standard-Bearer of Joan of Arc!” had speech with all sorts and
      conditions of folk, and he learned from some boatmen that there was a stir
      of some kind going on in the bastilles on the other side of the river; and
      in the evening, seeking further, he found a deserter from the fortress
      called the “Augustins,” who said that the English were going to send me
      over to strengthen the garrisons on our side during the darkness of the
      night, and were exulting greatly, for they meant to spring upon Dunois and
      the army when it was passing the bastilles and destroy it; a thing quite
      easy to do, since the “Witch” would not be there, and without her presence
      the army would do like the French armies of these many years past—drop
      their weapons and run when they saw an English face.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was ten at night when the Paladin brought this news and asked leave to
      speak to Joan, and I was up and on duty then. It was a bitter stroke to me
      to see what a chance I had lost. Joan made searching inquiries, and
      satisfied herself that the word was true, then she made this annoying
      remark:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You have done well, and you have my thanks. It may be that you have
      prevented a disaster. Your name and service shall receive official
      mention.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then he bowed low, and when he rose he was eleven feet high. As he swelled
      out past me he covertly pulled down the corner of his eye with his finger
      and muttered part of that defiled refrain, “Oh, tears, ah, tears, oh, sad
      sweet tears!—name in General Orders—personal mention to the
      King, you see!”
     </p>
    <p>
      I wished Joan could have seen his conduct, but she was busy thinking what
      she would do. Then she had me fetch the knight Jean de Metz, and in a
      minute he was off for La Hire’s quarters with orders for him and the Lord
      de Villars and Florent d’Illiers to report to her at five o’clock next
      morning with five hundred picked men well mounted. The histories say half
      past four, but it is not true, I heard the order given.
    </p>
    <p>
      We were on our way at five to the minute, and encountered the head of the
      arriving column between six and seven, a couple of leagues from the city.
      Dunois was pleased, for the army had begun to get restive and show
      uneasiness now that it was getting so near to the dreaded bastilles. But
      that all disappeared now, as the word ran down the line, with a huzza that
      swept along the length of it like a wave, that the Maid was come. Dunois
      asked her to halt and let the column pass in review, so that the men could
      be sure that the reports of her presence was not a ruse to revive their
      courage. So she took position at the side of the road with her staff, and
      the battalions swung by with a martial stride, huzzaing. Joan was armed,
      except her head. She was wearing the cunning little velvet cap with the
      mass of curved white ostrich plumes tumbling over its edges which the city
      of Orleans had given her the night she arrived—the one that is in
      the picture that hangs in the Hotel de Ville at Rouen. She was looking
      about fifteen. The sight of soldiers always set her blood to leaping, and
      lit the fires in her eyes and brought the warm rich color to her cheeks;
      it was then that you saw that she was too beautiful to be of the earth, or
      at any rate that there was a subtle something somewhere about her beauty
      that differed it from the human types of your experience and exalted it
      above them.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the train of wains laden with supplies a man lay on top of the goods.
      He was stretched out on his back, and his hands were tied together with
      ropes, and also his ankles. Joan signed to the officer in charge of that
      division of the train to come to her, and he rode up and saluted.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What is he that is bound there?” she asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      “A prisoner, General.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What is his offense?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He is a deserter.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What is to be done with him?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He will be hanged, but it was not convenient on the march, and there was
      no hurry.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Tell me about him.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He is a good soldier, but he asked leave to go and see his wife who was
      dying, he said, but it could not be granted; so he went without leave.
      Meanwhile the march began, and he only overtook us yesterday evening.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Overtook you? Did he come of his own will?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, it was of his own will.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He a deserter! Name of God! Bring him to me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The officer rode forward and loosed the man’s feet and brought him back
      with his hands still tied. What a figure he was—a good seven feet
      high, and built for business! He had a strong face; he had an unkempt
      shock of black hair which showed up a striking way when the officer
      removed his morion for him; for weapon he had a big ax in his broad
      leathern belt. Standing by Joan’s horse, he made Joan look littler than
      ever, for his head was about on a level with her own. His face was
      profoundly melancholy; all interest in life seemed to be dead in the man.
      Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Hold up your hands.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The man’s head was down. He lifted it when he heard that soft friendly
      voice, and there was a wistful something in his face which made one think
      that there had been music in it for him and that he would like to hear it
      again. When he raised his hands Joan laid her sword to his bonds, but the
      officer said with apprehension:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, madam—my General!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What is it?” she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      “He is under sentence!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, I know. I am responsible for him”; and she cut the bonds. They had
      lacerated his wrists, and they were bleeding. “Ah, pitiful!” she said;
      “blood—I do not like it”; and she shrank from the sight. But only
      for a moment. “Give me something, somebody, to bandage his wrists with.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The officer said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, my General! it is not fitting. Let me bring another to do it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Another? De par le Dieu! You would seek far to find one that can do it
      better than I, for I learned it long ago among both men and beasts. And I
      can tie better than those that did this; if I had tied him the ropes had
      not cut his flesh.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The man looked on silent, while he was being bandaged, stealing a furtive
      glance at Joan’s face occasionally, such as an animal might that is
      receiving a kindness form an unexpected quarter and is gropingly trying to
      reconcile the act with its source. All the staff had forgotten the
      huzzaing army drifting by in its rolling clouds of dust, to crane their
      necks and watch the bandaging as if it was the most interesting and
      absorbing novelty that ever was. I have often seen people do like that—get
      entirely lost in the simplest trifle, when it is something that is out of
      their line. Now there in Poitiers, once, I saw two bishops and a dozen of
      those grave and famous scholars grouped together watching a man paint a
      sign on a shop; they didn’t breathe, they were as good as dead; and when
      it began to sprinkle they didn’t know it at first; then they noticed it,
      and each man hove a deep sigh, and glanced up with a surprised look as
      wondering to see the others there, and how he came to be there himself—but
      that is the way with people, as I have said. There is no way of accounting
      for people. You have to take them as they are.
    </p>
    <p>
      “There,” said Joan at last, pleased with her success; “another could have
      done it no better—not as well, I think. Tell me—what is it you
      did? Tell me all.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The giant said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It was this way, my angel. My mother died, then my three little children,
      one after the other, all in two years. It was the famine; others fared so—it
      was God’s will. I saw them die; I had that grace; and I buried them. Then
      when my poor wife’s fate was come, I begged for leave to go to her—she
      who was so dear to me—she who was all I had; I begged on my knees.
      But they would not let me. Could I let her die, friendless and alone?
      Could I let her die believing I would not come? Would she let me die and
      she not come—with her feet free to do it if she would, and no cost
      upon it but only her life? Ah, she would come—she would come through
      the fire! So I went. I saw her. She died in my arms. I buried her. Then
      the army was gone. I had trouble to overtake it, but my legs are long and
      there are many hours in a day; I overtook it last night.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan said, musingly, as if she were thinking aloud:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It sounds true. If true, it were no great harm to suspend the law this
      one time—any would say that. It may not be true, but if it is true—”
       She turned suddenly to the man and said, “I would see your eyes—look
      up!” The eyes of the two met, and Joan said to the officer, “This man is
      pardoned. Give you good day; you may go.” Then she said to the man, “Did
      you know it was death to come back to the army?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes,” he said, “I knew it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then why did you do it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The man said, quite simply:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Because it was death. She was all I had. There was nothing left to love.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, yes, there was—France! The children of France have always their
      mother—they cannot be left with nothing to love. You shall live—and
      you shall serve France—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will serve you!”—“you shall fight for France—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will fight for you!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You shall be France’s soldier—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will be your soldier!”—“you shall give all your heart to France—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will give all my heart to you—and all my soul, if I have one—and
      all my strength, which is great—for I was dead and am alive again; I
      had nothing to live for, but now I have! You are France for me. You are my
      France, and I will have no other.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan smiled, and was touched and pleased at the man’s grave enthusiasm—solemn
      enthusiasm, one may call it, for the manner of it was deeper than mere
      gravity—and she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Well, it shall be as you will. What are you called?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The man answered with unsmiling simplicity:
    </p>
    <p>
      “They call me the Dwarf, but I think it is more in jest than otherwise.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made Joan laugh, and she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It has something of that look truly! What is the office of that vast ax?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The soldier replied with the same gravity—which must have been born
      to him, it sat upon him so naturally:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is to persuade persons to respect France.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan laughed again, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Have you given many lessons?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, indeed, yes—many.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The pupils behaved to suit you, afterward?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes; it made them quiet—quite pleasant and quiet.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I should think it would happen so. Would you like to be my man-at-arms?—orderly,
      sentinel, or something like that?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “If I may!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then you shall. You shall have proper armor, and shall go on teaching
      your art. Take one of those led horses there, and follow the staff when we
      move.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That is how we came by the Dwarf; and a good fellow he was. Joan picked
      him out on sight, but it wasn’t a mistake; no one could be faithfuler than
      he was, and he was a devil and the son of a devil when he turned himself
      loose with his ax. He was so big that he made the Paladin look like an
      ordinary man. He liked to like people, therefore people liked him. He
      liked us boys from the start; and he liked the knights, and liked pretty
      much everybody he came across; but he thought more of a paring of Joan’s
      finger-nail than he did of all the rest of the world put together.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, that is where we got him—stretched on the wain, going to his
      death, poor chap, and nobody to say a good word for him. He was a good
      find. Why, the knights treated him almost like an equal—it is the
      honest truth; that is the sort of a man he was. They called him the
      Bastille sometimes, and sometimes they called him Hellfire, which was on
      account of his warm and sumptuous style in battle, and you know they
      wouldn’t have given him pet names if they hadn’t had a good deal of
      affection for him.
    </p>
    <p>
      To the Dwarf, Joan was France, the spirit of France made flesh—he
      never got away from that idea that he had started with; and God knows it
      was the true one. That was a humble eye to see so great a truth where some
      others failed. To me that seems quite remarkable. And yet, after all, it
      was, in a way, just what nations do. When they love a great and noble
      thing, they embody it—they want it so that they can see it with
      their eyes; like liberty, for instance. They are not content with the
      cloudy abstract idea, they make a beautiful statue of it, and then their
      beloved idea is substantial and they can look at it and worship it. And so
      it is as I say; to the Dwarf, Joan was our country embodied, our country
      made visible flesh cast in a gracious form. When she stood before others,
      they saw Joan of Arc, but he saw France.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sometimes he would speak of her by that name. It shows you how the idea
      was embedded in his mind, and how real it was to him. The world has called
      our kings by it, but I know of none of them who has had so good a right as
      she to that sublime title.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the march past was finished, Joan returned to the front and rode at
      the head of the column. When we began to file past those grim bastilles
      and could glimpse the men within, standing to their guns and ready to
      empty death into our ranks, such a faintness came over me and such a
      sickness that all things seemed to turn dim and swim before my eyes; and
      the other boys looked droopy, too, I thought—including the Paladin,
      although I do not know this for certain, because he was ahead of me and I
      had to keep my eyes out toward the bastille side, because I could wince
      better when I saw what to wince at.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Joan was at home—in Paradise, I might say. She sat up straight,
      and I could see that she was feeling different from me. The awfulest thing
      was the silence; there wasn’t a sound but the screaking of the saddles,
      the measured tramplings, and the sneezing of the horses, afflicted by the
      smothering dust-clouds which they kicked up. I wanted to sneeze myself,
      but it seemed to me that I would rather go unsneezed, or suffer even a
      bitterer torture, if there is one, than attract attention to myself.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was not of a rank to make suggestions, or I would have suggested that if
      we went faster we should get by sooner. It seemed to me that it was an
      ill-judged time to be taking a walk. Just as we were drifting in that
      suffocating stillness past a great cannon that stood just within a raised
      portcullis, with nothing between me and it but the moat, a most uncommon
      jackass in there split the world with his bray, and I fell out of the
      saddle. Sir Bertrand grabbed me as I went, which was well, for if I had
      gone to the ground in my armor I could not have gotten up again by myself.
      The English warders on the battlements laughed a coarse laugh, forgetting
      that every one must begin, and that there had been a time when they
      themselves would have fared no better when shot by a jackass.
    </p>
    <p>
      The English never uttered a challenge nor fired a shot. It was said
      afterward that when their men saw the Maid riding at the front and saw how
      lovely she was, their eager courage cooled down in many cases and vanished
      in the rest, they feeling certain that the creature was not mortal, but
      the very child of Satan, and so the officers were prudent and did not try
      to make them fight. It was said also that some of the officers were
      affected by the same superstitious fears. Well, in any case, they never
      offered to molest us, and we poked by all the grisly fortresses in peace.
      During the march I caught up on my devotions, which were in arrears; so it
      was not all loss and no profit for me after all.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was on this march that the histories say Dunois told Joan that the
      English were expecting reinforcements under the command of Sir John
      Fastolfe, and that she turned upon him and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Bastard, Bastard, in God’s name I warn you to let me know of his coming
      as soon as you hear of it; for if he passes without my knowledge you shall
      lose your head!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It may be so; I don’t deny it; but I didn’t her it. If she really said it
      I think she only meant she would take off his official head—degrade
      him from his command. It was not like her to threaten a comrade’s life.
      She did have her doubts of her generals, and was entitled to them, for she
      was all for storm and assault, and they were for holding still and tiring
      the English out. Since they did not believe in her way and were
      experienced old soldiers, it would be natural for them to prefer their own
      and try to get around carrying hers out.
    </p>
    <p>
      But I did hear something that the histories didn’t mention and don’t know
      about. I heard Joan say that now that the garrisons on the other wide had
      been weakened to strengthen those on our side, the most effective point of
      operations had shifted to the south shore; so she meant to go over there
      and storm the forts which held the bridge end, and that would open up
      communication with our own dominions and raise the siege. The generals
      began to balk, privately, right away, but they only baffled and delayed
      her, and that for only four days.
    </p>
    <p>
      All Orleans met the army at the gate and huzzaed it through the bannered
      streets to its various quarters, but nobody had to rock it to sleep; it
      slumped down dog-tired, for Dunois had rushed it without mercy, and for
      the next twenty-four hours it would be quiet, all but the snoring.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 17 Sweet Fruit of Bitter Truth
    </h3>

    <p>
      WHEN WE got home, breakfast for us minor fry was waiting in our mess-room
      and the family honored us by coming in to eat it with us. The nice old
      treasurer, and in fact all three were flatteringly eager to hear about our
      adventures. Nobody asked the Paladin to begin, but he did begin, because
      now that his specially ordained and peculiar military rank set him above
      everybody on the personal staff but old D’Aulon, who didn’t eat with us,
      he didn’t care a farthing for the knights’ nobility no mine, but took
      precedence in the talk whenever it suited him, which was all the time,
      because he was born that way. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “God be thanked, we found the army in admirable condition I think I have
      never seen a finer body of animals.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Animals!” said Miss Catherine.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I will explain to you what he means,” said Noel. “He—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will trouble you not to trouble yourself to explain anything for me,”
       said the Paladin, loftily. “I have reason to think—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is his way,” said Noel; “always when he thinks he has reason to
      think, he thinks he does think, but this is an error. He didn’t see the
      army. I noticed him, and he didn’t see it. He was troubled by his old
      complaint.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What’s his old complaint?” Catherine asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Prudence,” I said, seeing my chance to help.
    </p>
    <p>
      But it was not a fortunate remark, for the Paladin said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It probably isn’t your turn to criticize people’s prudence—you who
      fall out of the saddle when a donkey brays.”
     </p>
    <p>
      They all laughed, and I was ashamed of myself for my hasty smartness. I
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It isn’t quite fair for you to say I fell out on account of the donkey’s
      braying. It was emotion, just ordinary emotion.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Very well, if you want to call it that, I am not objecting. What would
      you call it, Sir Bertrand?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Well, it—well, whatever it was, it was excusable, I think. All of
      you have learned how to behave in hot hand-to-hand engagements, and you
      don’t need to be ashamed of your record in that matter; but to walk along
      in front of death, with one’s hands idle, and no noise, no music, and
      nothing going on, is a very trying situation. If I were you, De Conte, I
      would name the emotion; it’s nothing to be ashamed of.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was as straight and sensible a speech as ever I heard, and I was
      grateful for the opening it gave me; so I came out and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It was fear—and thank you for the honest idea, too.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It was the cleanest and best way out,” said the old treasurer; “you’ve
      done well, my lad.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That made me comfortable, and when Miss Catherine said, “It’s what I
      think, too,” I was grateful to myself for getting into that scrape.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Jean de Metz said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “We were all in a body together when the donkey brayed, and it was
      dismally still at the time. I don’t see how any young campaigner could
      escape some little touch of that emotion.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked about him with a pleasant expression of inquiry on his good
      face, and as each pair of eyes in turn met his head they were in nodded a
      confession. Even the Paladin delivered his nod. That surprised everybody,
      and saved the Standard-Bearer’s credit. It was clever of him; nobody
      believed he could tell the truth that way without practice, or would tell
      that particular sort of a truth either with or without practice. I suppose
      he judged it would favorably impress the family. Then the old treasurer
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Passing the forts in that trying way required the same sort of nerve that
      a person must have when ghosts are about him in the dark, I should think.
      What does the Standard-Bearer think?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Well, I don’t quite know about that, sir. I’ve often thought I would like
      to see a ghost if I—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Would you?” exclaimed the young lady. “We’ve got one! Would you try that
      one? Will you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was so eager and pretty that the Paladin said straight out that he
      would; and then as none of the rest had bravery enough to expose the fear
      that was in him, one volunteered after the other with a prompt mouth and a
      sick heart till all were shipped for the voyage; then the girl clapped her
      hands in glee, and the parents were gratified, too, saying that the ghosts
      of their house had been a dread and a misery to them and their forebears
      for generations, and nobody had ever been found yet who was willing to
      confront them and find out what their trouble was, so that the family
      could heal it and content the poor specters and beguile them to
      tranquillity and peace.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 18 Joan’s First Battle-Field
    </h3>
    <p>
      ABOUT NOON I was chatting with Madame Boucher; nothing was going on, all
      was quiet, when Catherine Boucher suddenly entered in great excitement,
      and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Fly, sir, fly! The Maid was doing in her chair in my room, when she
      sprang up and cried out, ‘French blood is flowing!—my arms, give me
      my arms!’ Her giant was on guard at the door, and he brought D’Aulon, who
      began to arm her, and I and the giant have been warning the staff. Fly!—and
      stay by her; and if there really is a battle, keep her out of it—don’t
      let her risk herself—there is no need—if the men know she is
      near and looking on, it is all that is necessary. Keep her out of the
      fight—don’t fail of this!”
     </p>
    <p>
      I started on a run, saying, sarcastically—for I was always fond of
      sarcasm, and it was said that I had a most neat gift that way:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, yes, nothing easier than that—I’ll attend to it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      At the furthest end of the house I met Joan, fully armed, hurrying toward
      the door, and she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, French blood is being spilt, and you did not tell me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Indeed I did not know it,” I said; “there are no sounds of war;
      everything is quiet, your Excellency.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You will hear war-sounds enough in a moment,” she said, and was gone.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was true. Before one could count five there broke upon the stillness
      the swelling rush and tramp of an approaching multitude of men and horses,
      with hoarse cries of command; and then out of the distance came the
      muffled deep boom!—boom-boom!—boom! of cannon, and straightway
      that rushing multitude was roaring by the house like a hurricane.
    </p>
    <p>
      Our knights and all our staff came flying, armed, but with no horses
      ready, and we burst out after Joan in a body, the Paladin in the lead with
      the banner. The surging crowd was made up half of citizens and half of
      soldiers, and had no recognized leader. When Joan was seen a huzza went
      up, and she shouted:
    </p>
    <p>
      “A horse—a horse!”
     </p>
    <p>
      A dozen saddles were at her disposal in a moment. She mounted, a hundred
      people shouting:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Way, there—way for the MAID OF ORLEANS!” The first time that that
      immortal name was ever uttered—and I, praise God, was there to hear
      it! The mass divided itself like the waters of the Red Sea, and down this
      lane Joan went skimming like a bird, crying, “Forward, French hearts—follow
      me!” and we came winging in her wake on the rest of the borrowed horses,
      the holy standard streaming above us, and the lane closing together in our
      rear.
    </p>
    <p>
      This was a different thing from the ghastly march past the dismal
      bastilles. No, we felt fine, now, and all awhirl with enthusiasm. The
      explanation of this sudden uprising was this. The city and the little
      garrison, so long hopeless and afraid, had gone wild over Joan’s coming,
      and could no longer restrain their desire to get at the enemy; so, without
      orders from anybody, a few hundred soldiers and citizens had plunged out
      at the Burgundy gate on a sudden impulse and made a charge on one of Lord
      Talbot’s most formidable fortresses—St. Loup—and were getting
      the worst of it. The news of this had swept through the city and started
      this new crowd that we were with.
    </p>
    <p>
      As we poured out at the gate we met a force bringing in the wounded from
      the front. The sight moved Joan, and she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, French blood; it makes my hair rise to see it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      We were soon on the field, soon in the midst of the turmoil. Joan was
      seeing her first real battle, and so were we.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a battle in the open field; for the garrison of St. Loup had
      sallied confidently out to meet the attack, being used to victories when
      “witches” were not around. The sally had been reinforced by troops from
      the “Paris” bastille, and when we approached the French were getting
      whipped and were falling back. But when Joan came charging through the
      disorder with her banner displayed, crying “Forward, men—follow me!”
       there was a change; the French turned about and surged forward like a
      solid wave of the sea, and swept the English before them, hacking and
      slashing, and being hacked and slashed, in a way that was terrible to see.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the field the Dwarf had no assignment; that is to say, he was not under
      orders to occupy any particular place, therefore he chose his place for
      himself, and went ahead of Joan and made a road for her. It was horrible
      to see the iron helmets fly into fragments under his dreadful ax. He
      called it cracking nuts, and it looked like that. He made a good road, and
      paved it well with flesh and iron. Joan and the rest of us followed it so
      briskly that we outspeeded our forces and had the English behind us as
      well as before. The knights commanded us to face outward around Joan,
      which we did, and then there was work done that was fine to see. One was
      obliged to respect the Paladin, now. Being right under Joan’s exalting and
      transforming eye, he forgot his native prudence, he forgot his diffidence
      in the presence of danger, he forgot what fear was, and he never laid
      about him in his imaginary battles in a more tremendous way that he did in
      this real one; and wherever he struck there was an enemy the less.
    </p>
    <p>
      We were in that close place only a few minutes; then our forces to the
      rear broke through with a great shout and joined us, and then the English
      fought a retreating fight, but in a fine and gallant way, and we drove
      them to their fortress foot by foot, they facing us all the time, and
      their reserves on the walls raining showers of arrows, cross-bow bolts,
      and stone cannon-balls upon us.
    </p>
    <p>
      The bulk of the enemy got safely within the works and left us outside with
      piles of French and English dead and wounded for company—a sickening
      sight, an awful sight to us youngsters, for our little ambush fights in
      February had been in the night, and the blood and the mutilations and the
      dead faces were mercifully dim, whereas we saw these things now for the
      first time in all their naked ghastliness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now arrived Dunois from the city, and plunged through the battle on his
      foam-flecked horse and galloped up to Joan, saluting, and uttering
      handsome compliments as he came. He waved his hand toward the distant
      walls of the city, where a multitude of flags were flaunting gaily in the
      wind, and said the populace were up there observing her fortunate
      performance and rejoicing over it, and added that she and the forces would
      have a great reception now.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now? Hardly now, Bastard. Not yet!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why not yet? Is there more to be done?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “More, Bastard? We have but begun! We will take this fortress.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, you can’t be serious! We can’t take this place; let me urge you not
      to make the attempt; it is too desperate. Let me order the forces back.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s heart was overflowing with the joys and enthusiasms of war, and it
      made her impatient to hear such talk. She cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Bastard, Bastard, will ye play always with these English? Now verily I
      tell you we will not budge until this place is ours. We will carry it by
      storm. Sound the charge!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, my General—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Waste no more time, man—let the bugles sound the assault!” and we
      saw that strange deep light in her eye which we named the battle-light,
      and learned to know so well in later fields.
    </p>
    <p>
      The martial notes pealed out, the troops answered with a yell, and down
      they came against that formidable work, whose outlines were lost in its
      own cannon-smoke, and whose sides were spouting flame and thunder.
    </p>
    <p>
      We suffered repulse after repulse, but Joan was here and there and
      everywhere encouraging the men, and she kept them to their work. During
      three hours the tide ebbed and flowed, flowed and ebbed; but at last La
      Hire, who was now come, made a final and resistless charge, and the
      bastille St. Loup was ours. We gutted it, taking all its stores and
      artillery, and then destroyed it.
    </p>
    <p>
      When all our host was shouting itself hoarse with rejoicings, and there
      went up a cry for the General, for they wanted to praise her and glorify
      her and do her homage for her victory, we had trouble to find her; and
      when we did find her, she was off by herself, sitting among a ruck of
      corpses, with her face in her hands, crying—for she was a young
      girl, you know, and her hero heart was a young girl’s heart too, with the
      pity and the tenderness that are natural to it. She was thinking of the
      mothers of those dead friends and enemies.
    </p>
    <p>
      Among the prisoners were a number of priests, and Joan took these under
      her protection and saved their lives. It was urged that they were most
      probably combatants in disguise, but she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “As to that, how can any tell? They wear the livery of God, and if even
      one of these wears it rightfully, surely it were better that all the
      guilty should escape than that we have upon our hands the blood of that
      innocent man. I will lodge them where I lodge, and feed them, and sent
      them away in safety.”
     </p>
    <p>
      We marched back to the city with our crop of cannon and prisoners on view
      and our banners displayed. Here was the first substantial bit of war-work
      the imprisoned people had seen in the seven months that the siege had
      endured, the first chance they had had to rejoice over a French exploit.
      You may guess that they made good use of it. They and the bells went mad.
      Joan was their darling now, and the press of people struggling and
      shouldering each other to get a glimpse of her was so great that we could
      hardly push our way through the streets at all. Her new name had gone all
      about, and was on everybody’s lips. The Holy Maid of Vaucouleurs was a
      forgotten title; the city had claimed her for its own, and she was the
      MAID OF ORLEANS now. It is a happiness to me to remember that I heard that
      name the first time it was ever uttered. Between that first utterance and
      the last time it will be uttered on this earth—ah, think how many
      moldering ages will lie in that gap!
    </p>
    <p>
      The Boucher family welcomed her back as if she had been a child of the
      house, and saved from death against all hope or probability. They chided
      her for going into the battle and exposing herself to danger during all
      those hours. They could not realize that she had meant to carry her
      warriorship so far, and asked her if it had really been her purpose to go
      right into the turmoil of the fight, or hadn’t she got swept into it by
      accident and the rush of the troops? They begged her to be more careful
      another time. It was good advice, maybe, but it fell upon pretty
      unfruitful soil.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 19 We Burst In Upon Ghosts
    </h3>
    <p>
      BEING WORN out with the long fight, we all slept the rest of the afternoon
      away and two or three hours into the night. Then we got up refreshed, and
      had supper. As for me, I could have been willing to let the matter of the
      ghost drop; and the others were of a like mind, no doubt, for they talked
      diligently of the battle and said nothing of that other thing. And indeed
      it was fine and stirring to hear the Paladin rehearse his deeds and see
      him pile his dead, fifteen here, eighteen there, and thirty-five yonder;
      but this only postponed the trouble; it could not do more. He could not go
      on forever; when he had carried the bastille by assault and eaten up the
      garrison there was nothing for it but to stop, unless Catherine Boucher
      would give him a new start and have it all done over again—as we
      hoped she would, this time—but she was otherwise minded. As soon as
      there was a good opening and a fair chance, she brought up her unwelcome
      subject, and we faced it the best we could.
    </p>
    <p>
      We followed her and her parents to the haunted room at eleven o’clock,
      with candles, and also with torches to place in the sockets on the walls.
      It was a big house, with very thick walls, and this room was in a remote
      part of it which had been left unoccupied for nobody knew how many years,
      because of its evil repute.
    </p>
    <p>
      This was a large room, like a salon, and had a big table in it of enduring
      oak and well preserved; but the chair were worm-eaten and the tapestry on
      the walls was rotten and discolored by age. The dusty cobwebs under the
      ceiling had the look of not having had any business for a century.
    </p>
    <p>
      Catherine said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Tradition says that these ghosts have never been seen—they have
      merely been heard. It is plain that this room was once larger than it is
      now, and that the wall at this end was built in some bygone time to make
      and fence off a narrow room there. There is no communication anywhere with
      that narrow room, and if it exists—and of that there is no
      reasonable doubt—it has no light and no air, but is an absolute
      dungeon. Wait where you are, and take note of what happens.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That was all. Then she and her parents left us. When their footfalls had
      died out in the distance down the empty stone corridors an uncanny silence
      and solemnity ensued which was dismaler to me than the mute march past the
      bastilles. We sat looking vacantly at each other, and it was easy to see
      that no one there was comfortable. The longer we sat so, the more deadly
      still that stillness got to be; and when the wind began to moan around the
      house presently, it made me sick and miserable, and I wished I had been
      brave enough to be a coward this time, for indeed it is no proper shame to
      be afraid of ghosts, seeing how helpless the living are in their hands.
      And then these ghosts were invisible, which made the matter the worse, as
      it seemed to me. They might be in the room with us at that moment—we
      could not know. I felt airy touches on my shoulders and my hair, and I
      shrank from them and cringed, and was not ashamed to show this fear, for I
      saw the others doing the like, and knew that they were feeling those faint
      contacts too. As this went on—oh, eternities it seemed, the time
      dragged so drearily—all those faces became as wax, and I seemed
      sitting with a congress of the dead.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last, faint and far and weird and slow, came a “boom!—boom!—boom!”—a
      distant bell tolling midnight. When the last stroke died, that depressing
      stillness followed again, and as before I was staring at those waxen faces
      and feeling those airy touches on my hair and my shoulders once more.
    </p>
    <p>
      One minute—two minutes—three minutes of this, then we heard a
      long deep groan, and everybody sprang up and stood, with his legs quaking.
      It came from that little dungeon. There was a pause, then we herd muffled
      sobbings, mixed with pitiful ejaculations. Then there was a second voice,
      low and not distinct, and the one seemed trying to comfort the other; and
      so the two voices went on, with moanings, and soft sobbings, and, ah, the
      tones were so full of compassion and sorry and despair! Indeed, it made
      one’s heart sore to hear it.
    </p>
    <p>
      But those sounds were so real and so human and so moving that the idea of
      ghosts passed straight out of our minds, and Sir Jean de Metz spoke out
      and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Come! we will smash that wall and set those poor captives free. Here,
      with your ax!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Dwarf jumped forward, swinging his great ax with both hands, and
      others sprang for torches and brought them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Bang!—whang!—slam!—smash went the ancient bricks, and
      there was a hole an ox could pass through. We plunged within and held up
      the torches.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nothing there but vacancy! On the floor lay a rusty sword and a rotten
      fan.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now you know all that I know. Take the pathetic relics, and weave about
      them the romance of the dungeon’s long-vanished inmates as best you can.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 20 Joan Makes Cowards Brave Victors
    </h3>

    <p>
      THE NEXT day Joan wanted to go against the enemy again, but it was the
      feast of the Ascension, and the holy council of bandit generals were too
      pious to be willing to profane it with bloodshed. But privately they
      profaned it with plottings, a sort of industry just in their line. They
      decided to do the only thing proper to do now in the new circumstances of
      the case—feign an attack on the most important bastille on the
      Orleans side, and then, if the English weakened the far more important
      fortresses on the other side of the river to come to its help, cross in
      force and capture those works. This would give them the bridge and free
      communication with the Sologne, which was French territory. They decided
      to keep this latter part of the program secret from Joan.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan intruded and took them by surprise. She asked them what they were
      about and what they had resolved upon. They said they had resolved to
      attack the most important of the English bastilles on the Orleans side
      next morning—and there the spokesman stopped. Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Well, go on.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “There is nothing more. That is all.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Am I to believe this? That is to say, am I to believe that you have lost
      your wits?” She turned to Dunois, and said, “Bastard, you have sense,
      answer me this: if this attack is made and the bastille taken, how much
      better off would we be than we are now?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Bastard hesitated, and then began some rambling talk not quite germane
      to the question. Joan interrupted him and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “That will not do, good Bastard, you have answered. Since the Bastard is
      not able to mention any advantage to be gained by taking that bastille and
      stopping there, it is not likely that any of you could better the matter.
      You waste much time here in inventing plans that lead to nothing, and
      making delays that are a damage. Are you concealing something from me?
      Bastard, this council has a general plan, I take it; without going into
      details, what is it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is the same it was in the beginning, seven months ago—to get
      provisions for a long siege, then sit down and tire the English out.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “In the name of God! As if seven months was not enough, you want to
      provide for a year of it. Now ye shall drop these pusillanimous dreams—the
      English shall go in three days!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Several exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, General, General, be prudent!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Be prudent and starve? Do ye call that war? I tell you this, if you do
      not already know it: The new circumstances have changed the face of
      matters. The true point of attack has shifted; it is on the other side of
      the river now. One must take the fortifications that command the bridge.
      The English know that if we are not fools and cowards we will try to do
      that. They are grateful for your piety in wasting this day. They will
      reinforce the bridge forts from this side to-night, knowing what ought to
      happen to-morrow. You have but lost a day and made our task harder, for we
      will cross and take the bridge forts. Bastard, tell me the truth—does
      not this council know that there is no other course for us than the one I
      am speaking of?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Dunois conceded that the council did know it to be the most desirable, but
      considered it impracticable; and he excused the council as well as he
      could by saying that inasmuch as nothing was really and rationally to be
      hoped for but a long continuance of the siege and wearying out of the
      English, they were naturally a little afraid of Joan’s impetuous notions.
      He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You see, we are sure that the waiting game is the best, whereas you would
      carry everything by storm.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That I would!—and moreover that I will! You have my orders—here
      and now. We will move upon the forts of the south bank to-morrow at dawn.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And carry them by storm?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, carry them by storm!”
     </p>
    <p>
      La Hire came clanking in, and heard the last remark. He cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “By my baton, that is the music I love to hear! Yes, that is the right
      time and the beautiful words, my General—we will carry them by
      storm!”
     </p>
    <p>
      He saluted in his large way and came up and shook Joan by the hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some member of the council was heard to say:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It follows, then, that we must begin with the bastille St. John, and that
      will give the English time to—”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan turned and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Give yourselves no uneasiness about the bastille St. John. The English
      will know enough to retire from it and fall back on the bridge bastilles
      when they see us coming.” She added, with a touch of sarcasm, “Even a
      war-council would know enough to do that itself.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she took her leave. La Hire made this general remark to the council:
    </p>
    <p>
      “She is a child, and that is all ye seem to see. Keep to that superstition
      if you must, but you perceive that this child understands this complex
      game of war as well as any of you; and if you want my opinion without the
      trouble of asking for it, here you have it without ruffles or embroidery—by
      God, I think she can teach the best of you how to play it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan had spoken truly; the sagacious English saw that the policy of the
      French had undergone a revolution; that the policy of paltering and
      dawdling was ended; that in place of taking blows, blows were ready to be
      struck now; therefore they made ready for the new state of things by
      transferring heavy reinforcements to the bastilles of the south bank from
      those of the north.
    </p>
    <p>
      The city learned the great news that once more in French history, after
      all these humiliating years, France was going to take the offensive; that
      France, so used to retreating, was going to advance; that France, so long
      accustomed to skulking, was going to face about and strike. The joy of the
      people passed all bounds. The city walls were black with them to see the
      army march out in the morning in that strange new position—its
      front, not its tail, toward an English camp. You shall imagine for
      yourselves what the excitement was like and how it expressed itself, when
      Joan rode out at the head of the host with her banner floating above her.
    </p>
    <p>
      We crossed the five in strong force, and a tedious long job it was, for
      the boats were small and not numerous. Our landing on the island of St.
      Aignan was not disputed. We threw a bridge of a few boats across the
      narrow channel thence to the south shore and took up our march in good
      order and unmolested; for although there was a fortress there—St.
      John—the English vacated and destroyed it and fell back on the
      bridge forts below as soon as our first boats were seen to leave the
      Orleans shore; which was what Joan had said would happen, when she was
      disputing with the council.
    </p>
    <p>
      We moved down the shore and Joan planted her standard before the bastille
      of the Augustins, the first of the formidable works that protected the end
      of the bridge. The trumpets sounded the assault, and two charges followed
      in handsome style; but we were too weak, as yet, for our main body was
      still lagging behind. Before we could gather for a third assault the
      garrison of St. Prive were seen coming up to reinforce the big bastille.
      They came on a run, and the Augustins sallied out, and both forces came
      against us with a rush, and sent our small army flying in a panic, and
      followed us, slashing and slaying, and shouting jeers and insults at us.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan was doing her best to rally the men, but their wits were gone, their
      hearts were dominated for the moment by the old-time dread of the English.
      Joan’s temper flamed up, and she halted and commanded the trumpets to
      sound the advance. Then she wheeled about and cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If there is but a dozen of you that are not cowards, it is enough—follow
      me!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Away she went, and after her a few dozen who had heard her words and been
      inspired by them. The pursuing force was astonished to see her sweeping
      down upon them with this handful of men, and it was their turn now to
      experience a grisly fright—surely this is a witch, this is a child
      of Satan! That was their thought—and without stopping to analyze the
      matter they turned and fled in a panic.
    </p>
    <p>
      Our flying squadrons heard the bugle and turned to look; and when they saw
      the Maid’s banner speeding in the other direction and the enemy scrambling
      ahead of it in disorder, their courage returned and they came scouring
      after us.
    </p>
    <p>
      La Hire heard it and hurried his force forward and caught up with us just
      as we were planting our banner again before the ramparts of the Augustins.
      We were strong enough now. We had a long and tough piece of work before
      us, but we carried it through before night, Joan keeping us hard at it,
      and she and La Hire saying we were able to take that big bastille, and
      must. The English fought like—well, they fought like the English;
      when that is said, there is no more to say. We made assault after assault,
      through the smoke and flame and the deafening cannon-blasts, and at last
      as the sun was sinking we carried the place with a rush, and planted our
      standard on its walls.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Augustins was ours. The Tourelles must be ours, too, if we would free
      the bridge and raise the siege. We had achieved one great undertaking,
      Joan was determined to accomplish the other. We must lie on our arms where
      we were, hold fast to what we had got, and be ready for business in the
      morning. So Joan was not minded to let the men be demoralized by pillage
      and riot and carousings; she had the Augustins burned, with all its stores
      in it, excepting the artillery and ammunition.
    </p>
    <p>
      Everybody was tired out with this long day’s hard work, and of course this
      was the case with Joan; still, she wanted to stay with the army before the
      Tourelles, to be ready for the assault in the morning. The chiefs argued
      with her, and at last persuaded her to go home and prepare for the great
      work by taking proper rest, and also by having a leech look to a wound
      which she had received in her foot. So we crossed with them and went home.
    </p>
    <p>
      Just as usual, we found the town in a fury of joy, all the bells clanging,
      everybody shouting, and several people drunk. We never went out or came in
      without furnishing good and sufficient reasons for one of these pleasant
      tempests, and so the tempest was always on hand. There had been a blank
      absence of reasons for this sort of upheavals for the past seven months,
      therefore the people too to the upheavals with all the more relish on that
      account.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 21 She Gently Reproves Her Dear Friend
    </h3>
    <p>
      TO GET away from the usual crowd of visitors and have a rest, Joan went
      with Catherine straight to the apartment which the two occupied together,
      and there they took their supper and there the wound was dressed. But
      then, instead of going to bed, Joan, weary as she was, sent the Dwarf for
      me, in spite of Catherine’s protests and persuasions. She said she had
      something on her mind, and must send a courier to Domremy with a letter
      for our old Pere Fronte to read to her mother. I came, and she began to
      dictate. After some loving words and greetings to her mother and family,
      came this:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But the thing which moves me to write now, is to say that when you
      presently hear that I am wounded, you shall give yourself no concern about
      it, and refuse faith to any that shall try to make you believe it is
      serious.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was going on, when Catherine spoke up and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, but it will fright her so to read these words. Strike them out, Joan,
      strike them out, and wait only one day—two days at most—then
      write and say your foot was wounded but is well again—for it surely
      be well then, or very near it. Don’t distress her, Joan; do as I say.”
     </p>
    <p>
      A laugh like the laugh of the old days, the impulsive free laugh of an
      untroubled spirit, a laugh like a chime of bells, was Joan’s answer; then
      she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “My foot? Why should I write about such a scratch as that? I was not
      thinking of it, dear heart.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Child, have you another wound and a worse, and have not spoken of it?
      What have you been dreaming about, that you—”
     </p>
    <p>
      She had jumped up, full of vague fears, to have the leech called back at
      once, but Joan laid her hand upon her arm and made her sit down again,
      saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There, now, be tranquil, there is no other wound, as yet; I am writing
      about one which I shall get when we storm that bastille tomorrow.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Catherine had the look of one who is trying to understand a puzzling
      proposition but cannot quite do it. She said, in a distraught fashion:
    </p>
    <p>
      “A wound which you are going to get? But—but why grieve your mother
      when it—when it may not happen?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “May not? Why, it will.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The puzzle was a puzzle still. Catherine said in that same abstracted way
      as before:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Will. It is a strong word. I cannot seem to—my mind is not able to
      take hold of this. Oh, Joan, such a presentiment is a dreadful thing—it
      takes one’s peace and courage all away. Cast it from you!—drive it
      out! It will make your whole night miserable, and to no good; for we will
      hope—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But it isn’t a presentiment—it is a fact. And it will not make me
      miserable. It is uncertainties that do that, but this is not an
      uncertainty.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, do you know it is going to happen?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, I know it. My Voices told me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah,” said Catherine, resignedly, “if they told you—But are you sure
      it was they?—quite sure?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, quite. It will happen—there is no doubt.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is dreadful! Since when have you know it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Since—I think it is several weeks.” Joan turned to me. “Louis, you
      will remember. How long is it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Your Excellency spoke of it first to the King, in Chinon,” I answered;
      “that was as much as seven weeks ago. You spoke of it again the 20th of
      April, and also the 22d, two weeks ago, as I see by my record here.”
     </p>
    <p>
      These marvels disturbed Catherine profoundly, but I had long ceased to be
      surprised at them. One can get used to anything in this world. Catherine
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “And it is to happen to-morrow?—always to-morrow? Is it the same
      date always? There has been no mistake, and no confusion?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No,” Joan said, “the 7th of May is the date—there is no other.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then you shall not go a step out of this house till that awful day is
      gone by! You will not dream of it, Joan, will you?—promise that you
      will stay with us.”
     </p>
    <p>
      But Joan was not persuaded. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It would not help the matter, dear good friend. The wound is to come, and
      come to-morrow. If I do not seek it, it will seek me. My duty calls me to
      that place to-morrow; I should have to go if my death were waiting for me
      there; shall I stay away for only a wound? Oh, no, we must try to do
      better than that.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then you are determined to go?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Of a certainty, yes. There is only one thing that I can do for France—hearten
      her soldiers for battle and victory.” She thought a moment, then added,
      “However, one should not be unreasonable, and I would do much to please
      you, who are so good to me. Do you love France?”
     </p>
    <p>
      I wondered what she might be contriving now, but I saw no clue. Catherine
      said, reproachfully:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, what have I done to deserve this question?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then you do love France. I had not doubted it, dear. Do not be hurt, but
      answer me—have you ever told a lie?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “In my life I have not wilfully told a lie—fibs, but no lies.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is sufficient. You love France and do not tell lies; therefore I
      will trust you. I will go or I will stay, as you shall decide.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, I thank you from my heart, Joan! How good and dear it is of you to do
      this for me! Oh, you shall stay, and not go!”
     </p>
    <p>
      In her delight she flung her arms about Joan’s neck and squandered
      endearments upon her the least of which would have made me rich, but, as
      it was, they only made me realize how poor I was—how miserably poor
      in what I would most have prized in this world. Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Then you will send word to my headquarters that I am not going?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, gladly. Leave that to me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is good of you. And how will you word it?—for it must have
      proper official form. Shall I word it for you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, do—for you know about these solemn procedures and stately
      proprieties, and I have had no experience.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then word it like this: ‘The chief of staff is commanded to make known to
      the King’s forces in garrison and in the field, that the General-in-Chief
      of the Armies of France will not face the English on the morrow, she being
      afraid she may get hurt. Signed, JOAN OF ARC, by the hand of CATHERINE
      BOUCHER, who loves France.’”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a pause—a silence of the sort that tortures one into
      stealing a glance to see how the situation looks, and I did that. There
      was a loving smile on Joan’s face, but the color was mounting in crimson
      waves into Catherine’s, and her lips were quivering and the tears
      gathering; then she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, I am so ashamed of myself!—and you are so noble and brave and
      wise, and I am so paltry—so paltry and such a fool!” and she broke
      down and began to cry, and I did so want to take her in my arms and
      comfort her, but Joan did it, and of course I said nothing. Joan did it
      well, and most sweetly and tenderly, but I could have done it as well,
      though I knew it would be foolish and out of place to suggest such a
      thing, and might make an awkwardness, too, and be embarrassing to us all,
      so I did not offer, and I hope I did right and for the best, though I
      could not know, and was many times tortured with doubts afterward as
      having perhaps let a chance pass which might have changed all my life and
      made it happier and more beautiful than, alas, it turned out to be. For
      this reason I grieve yet, when I think of that scene, and do not like to
      call it up out of the deeps of my memory because of the pangs it brings.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, well, a good and wholesome thing is a little harmless fun in this
      world; it tones a body up and keeps him human and prevents him from
      souring. To set that little trap for Catherine was as good and effective a
      way as any to show her what a grotesque thing she was asking of Joan. It
      was a funny idea now, wasn’t it, when you look at it all around? Even
      Catherine dried up her tears and laughed when she thought of the English
      getting hold of the French Commander-in-Chief’s reason for staying out of
      a battle. She granted that they could have a good time over a thing like
      that.
    </p>
    <p>
      We got to work on the letter again, and of course did not have to strike
      out the passage about the wound. Joan was in fine spirits; but when she
      got to sending messages to this, that, and the other playmate and friend,
      it brought our village and the Fairy Tree and the flowery plain and the
      browsing sheep and all the peaceful beauty of our old humble home-place
      back, and the familiar names began to tremble on her lips; and when she
      got to Haumette and Little Mengette it was no use, her voice broke and she
      couldn’t go on. She waited a moment, then said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Give them my love—my warm love—my deep love—oh, out of
      my heart of hearts! I shall never see our home any more.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Now came Pasquerel, Joan’s confessor, and introduced a gallant knight, the
      Sire de Rais, who had been sent with a message. He said he was instructed
      to say that the council had decided that enough had been done for the
      present; that it would be safest and best to be content with what God had
      already done; that the city was now well victualed and able to stand a
      long siege; that the wise course must necessarily be to withdraw the
      troops from the other side of the river and resume the defensive—therefore
      they had decided accordingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      “The incurable cowards!” exclaimed Joan. “So it was to get me away from my
      men that they pretended so much solicitude about my fatigue. Take this
      message back, not to the council—I have no speeches for those
      disguised ladies’ maids—but to the Bastard and La Hire, who are men.
      Tell them the army is to remain where it is, and I hold them responsible
      if this command miscarries. And say the offensive will be resumed in the
      morning. You may go, good sir.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she said to her priest:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Rise early, and be by me all the day. There will be much work on my
      hands, and I shall be hurt between my neck and my shoulder.”
     </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 22 The Fate of France Decided
    </h3>
    <p>
      WE WERE up at dawn, and after mass we started. In the hall we met the
      master of the house, who was grieved, good man, to see Joan going
      breakfastless to such a day’s work, and begged her to wait and eat, but
      she couldn’t afford the time—that is to say, she couldn’t afford the
      patience, she being in such a blaze of anxiety to get at that last
      remaining bastille which stood between her and the completion of the first
      great step in the rescue and redemption of France. Boucher put in another
      plea:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But think—we poor beleaguered citizens who have hardly known the
      flavor of fish for these many months, have spoil of that sort again, and
      we owe it to you. There’s a noble shad for breakfast; wait—be
      persuaded.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, there’s going to be fish in plenty; when this day’s work is done the
      whole river-front will be yours to do as you please with.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, your Excellency will do well, that I know; but we don’t require quite
      that much, even of you; you shall have a month for it in place of a day.
      Now be beguiled—wait and eat. There’s a saying that he that would
      cross a river twice in the same day in a boat, will do well to eat fish
      for luck, lest he have an accident.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That doesn’t fit my case, for to-day I cross but once in a boat.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, don’t say that. Aren’t you coming back to us?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, but not in a boat.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “How, then?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “By the bridge.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Listen to that—by the bridge! Now stop this jesting, dear General,
      and do as I would have done you. It’s a noble fish.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Be good then, and save me some for supper; and I will bring one of those
      Englishmen with me and he shall have his share.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, well, have your way if you must. But he that fasts must attempt but
      little and stop early. When shall you be back?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “When we’ve raised the siege of Orleans. FORWARD!”
     </p>
    <p>
      We were off. The streets were full of citizens and of groups and squads of
      soldiers, but the spectacle was melancholy. There was not a smile
      anywhere, but only universal gloom. It was as if some vast calamity had
      smitten all hope and cheer dead. We were not used to this, and were
      astonished. But when they saw the Maid, there was an immediate stir, and
      the eager question flew from mouth to mouth.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Where is she going? Whither is she bound?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan heard it, and called out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Whither would ye suppose? I am going to take the Tourelles.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It would not be possible for any to describe how those few words turned
      that mourning into joy—into exaltation—into frenzy; and how a
      storm of huzzas burst out and swept down the streets in every direction
      and woke those corpse-like multitudes to vivid life and action and turmoil
      in a moment. The soldiers broke from the crowd and came flocking to our
      standard, and many of the citizens ran and got pikes and halberds and
      joined us. As we moved on, our numbers increased steadily, and the
      hurrahing continued—yes, we moved through a solid cloud of noise, as
      you may say, and all the windows on both sides contributed to it, for they
      were filled with excited people.
    </p>
    <p>
      You see, the council had closed the Burgundy gate and placed a strong
      force there, under that stout soldier Raoul de Gaucourt, Bailly of
      Orleans, with orders to prevent Joan from getting out and resuming the
      attack on the Tourelles, and this shameful thing had plunged the city into
      sorrow and despair. But that feeling was gone now. They believed the Maid
      was a match for the council, and they were right.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we reached the gate, Joan told Gaucourt to open it and let her pass.
    </p>
    <p>
      He said it would be impossible to do this, for his orders were from the
      council and were strict. Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There is no authority above mine but the King’s. If you have an order
      from the King, produce it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I cannot claim to have an order from him, General.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then make way, or take the consequences!”
     </p>
    <p>
      He began to argue the case, for he was like the rest of the tribe, always
      ready to fight with words, not acts; but in the midst of his gabble Joan
      interrupted with the terse order:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Charge!”
     </p>
    <p>
      We came with a rush, and brief work we made of that small job. It was good
      to see the Bailly’s surprise. He was not used to this unsentimental
      promptness. He said afterward that he was cut off in the midst of what he
      was saying—in the midst of an argument by which he could have proved
      that he could not let Joan pass—an argument which Joan could not
      have answered.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Still, it appears she did answer it,” said the person he was talking to.
    </p>
    <p>
      We swung through the gate in great style, with a vast accession of noise,
      the most of which was laughter, and soon our van was over the river and
      moving down against the Tourelles.
    </p>
    <p>
      First we must take a supporting work called a boulevard, and which was
      otherwise nameless, before we could assault the great bastille. Its rear
      communicated with the bastille by a drawbridge, under which ran a swift
      and deep strip of the Loire. The boulevard was strong, and Dunois doubted
      our ability to take it, but Joan had no such doubt. She pounded it with
      artillery all the forenoon, then about noon she ordered an assault and led
      it herself. We poured into the fosse through the smoke and a tempest of
      missiles, and Joan, shouting encouragements to her men, started to climb a
      scaling-ladder, when that misfortune happened which we knew was to happen—the
      iron bolt from an arbaquest struck between her neck and her shoulder, and
      tore its way down through her armor. When she felt the sharp pain and saw
      her blood gushing over her breast, she was frightened, poor girl, and as
      she sank to the ground she began to cry bitterly.
    </p>
    <p>
      The English sent up a glad shout and came surging down in strong force to
      take her, and then for a few minutes the might of both adversaries was
      concentrated upon that spot. Over her and above her, English and French
      fought with desperation—for she stood for France, indeed she was
      France to both sides—whichever won her won France, and could keep it
      forever. Right there in that small spot, and in ten minutes by the clock,
      the fate of France, for all time, was to be decided, and was decided.
    </p>
    <p>
      If the English had captured Joan then, Charles VII. would have flown the
      country, the Treaty of Troyes would have held good, and France, already
      English property, would have become, without further dispute, an English
      province, to so remain until Judgment Day. A nationality and a kingdom
      were at stake there, and no more time to decide it in than it takes to
      hard-boil an egg. It was the most momentous ten minutes that the clock has
      ever ticked in France, or ever will. Whenever you read in histories about
      hours or days or weeks in which the fate of one or another nation hung in
      the balance, do not you fail to remember, nor your French hearts to beat
      the quicker for the remembrance, the ten minutes that France, called
      otherwise Joan of Arc, lay bleeding in the fosse that day, with two
      nations struggling over her for her possession.
    </p>
    <p>
      And you will not forget the Dwarf. For he stood over her, and did the work
      of any six of the others. He swung his ax with both hands; whenever it
      came down, he said those two words, “For France!” and a splintered helmet
      flew like eggshells, and the skull that carried it had learned its manners
      and would offend the French no more. He piled a bulwark of iron-clad dead
      in front of him and fought from behind it; and at last when the victory
      was ours we closed about him, shielding him, and he ran up a ladder with
      Joan as easily as another man would carry a child, and bore her out of the
      battle, a great crowd following and anxious, for she was drenched with
      blood to her feet, half of it her own and the other half English, for
      bodies had fallen across her as she lay and had poured their red
      life-streams over her. One couldn’t see the white armor now, with that
      awful dressing over it.
    </p>
    <p>
      The iron bolt was still in the wound—some say it projected out
      behind the shoulder. It may be—I did not wish to see, and did not
      try to. It was pulled out, and the pain made Joan cry again, poor thing.
      Some say she pulled it out herself because others refused, saying they
      could not bear to hurt her. As to this I do not know; I only know it was
      pulled out, and that the wound was treated with oil and properly dressed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan lay on the grass, weak and suffering, hour after hour, but still
      insisting that the fight go on. Which it did, but not to much purpose, for
      it was only under her eye that men were heroes and not afraid. They were
      like the Paladin; I think he was afraid of his shadow—I mean in the
      afternoon, when it was very big and long; but when he was under Joan’s eye
      and the inspiration of her great spirit, what was he afraid of? Nothing in
      this world—and that is just the truth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Toward night Dunois gave it up. Joan heard the bugles.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What!” she cried. “Sounding the retreat!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Her wound was forgotten in a moment. She countermanded the order, and sent
      another, to the officer in command of a battery, to stand ready to fire
      five shots in quick succession. This was a signal to the force on the
      Orleans side of the river under La Hire, who was not, as some of the
      histories say, with us. It was to be given whenever Joan should feel sure
      the boulevard was about to fall into her hands—then that force must
      make a counter-attack on the Tourelles by way of the bridge.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan mounted her horse now, with her staff about her, and when our people
      saw us coming they raised a great shout, and were at once eager for
      another assault on the boulevard. Joan rode straight to the fosse where
      she had received her wound, and standing there in the rain of bolts and
      arrows, she ordered the Paladin to let her long standard blow free, and to
      note when its fringes should touch the fortress. Presently he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It touches.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now, then,” said Joan to the waiting battalions, “the place is yours—enter
      in! Bugles, sound the assault! Now, then—all together—go!”
     </p>
    <p>
      And go it was. You never saw anything like it. We swarmed up the ladders
      and over the battlements like a wave—and the place was our property.
      Why, one might live a thousand years and never see so gorgeous a thing as
      that again. There, hand to hand, we fought like wild beasts, for there was
      no give-up to those English—there was no way to convince one of
      those people but to kill him, and even then he doubted. At least so it was
      thought, in those days, and maintained by many.
    </p>
    <p>
      We were busy and never heard the five cannon-shots fired, but they were
      fired a moment after Joan had ordered the assault; and so, while we were
      hammering and being hammered in the smaller fortress, the reserve on the
      Orleans side poured across the bridge and attacked the Tourelles from that
      side. A fire-boat was brought down and moored under the drawbridge which
      connected the Tourelles with our boulevard; wherefore, when at last we
      drove our English ahead of us and they tried to cross that drawbridge and
      join their friends in the Tourelles, the burning timbers gave way under
      them and emptied them in a mass into the river in their heavy armor—and
      a pitiful sight it was to see brave men die such a death as that.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, God pity them!” said Joan, and wept to see that sorrowful spectacle.
      She said those gentle words and wept those compassionate tears although
      one of those perishing men had grossly insulted her with a coarse name
      three days before, when she had sent him a message asking him to
      surrender. That was their leader, Sir Williams Glasdale, a most valorous
      knight. He was clothed all in steel; so he plunged under water like a
      lance, and of course came up no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      We soon patched a sort of bridge together and threw ourselves against the
      last stronghold of the English power that barred Orleans from friends and
      supplies. Before the sun was quite down, Joan’s forever memorable day’s
      work was finished, her banner floated from the fortress of the Tourelles,
      her promise was fulfilled, she had raised the siege of Orleans!
    </p>
    <p>
      The seven months’ beleaguerment was ended, the thing which the first
      generals of France had called impossible was accomplished; in spite of all
      that the King’s ministers and war-councils could do to prevent it, this
      little country-maid at seventeen had carried her immortal task through,
      and had done it in four days!
    </p>
    <p>
      Good news travels fast, sometimes, as well as bad. By the time we were
      ready to start homeward by the bridge the whole city of Orleans was one
      red flame of bonfires, and the heavens blushed with satisfaction to see
      it; and the booming and bellowing of cannon and the banging of bells
      surpassed by great odds anything that even Orleans had attempted before in
      the way of noise.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we arrived—well, there is no describing that. Why, those acres
      of people that we plowed through shed tears enough to raise the river;
      there was not a face in the glare of those fires that hadn’t tears
      streaming down it; and if Joan’s feet had not been protected by iron they
      would have kissed them off of her. “Welcome! welcome to the Maid of
      Orleans!” That was the cry; I heard it a hundred thousand times. “Welcome
      to our Maid!” some of them worded it.
    </p>
    <p>
      No other girl in all history has ever reached such a summit of glory as
      Joan of Arc reached that day. And do you think it turned her head, and
      that she sat up to enjoy that delicious music of homage and applause? No;
      another girl would have done that, but not this one. That was the greatest
      heart and the simplest that ever beat. She went straight to bed and to
      sleep, like any tired child; and when the people found she was wounded and
      would rest, they shut off all passage and traffic in that region and stood
      guard themselves the whole night through, to see that he slumbers were not
      disturbed. They said, “She has given us peace, she shall have peace
      herself.”
     </p>
    <p>
      All knew that that region would be empty of English next day, and all said
      that neither the present citizens nor their posterity would ever cease to
      hold that day sacred to the memory of Joan of Arc. That word has been true
      for more than sixty years; it will continue so always. Orleans will never
      forget the 8th of May, nor ever fail to celebrate it. It is Joan of Arc’s
      day—and holy. (1)
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
(1)It is still celebrated every year with civic and military pomps and
solemnities.—TRANSLATOR.
</pre>
    <h3>
      Chapter 23 Joan Inspires the Tawdry King
    </h3>

    <p>
      IN THE earliest dawn of morning, Talbot and his English forces evacuated
      their bastilles and marched away, not stopping to burn, destroy, or carry
      off anything, but leaving their fortresses just as they were, provisioned,
      armed, and equipped for a long siege. It was difficult for the people to
      believe that this great thing had really happened; that they were actually
      free once more, and might go and come through any gate they pleased, with
      none to molest or forbid; that the terrible Talbot, that scourge of the
      French, that man whose mere name had been able to annul the effectiveness
      of French armies, was gone, vanished, retreating—driven away by a
      girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      The city emptied itself. Out of every gate the crowds poured. They swarmed
      about the English bastilles like an invasion of ants, but noisier than
      those creatures, and carried off the artillery and stores, then turned all
      those dozen fortresses into monster bonfires, imitation volcanoes whose
      lofty columns of thick smoke seemed supporting the arch of the sky.
    </p>
    <p>
      The delight of the children took another form. To some of the younger ones
      seven months was a sort of lifetime. They had forgotten what grass was
      like, and the velvety green meadows seemed paradise to their surprised and
      happy eyes after the long habit of seeing nothing but dirty lanes and
      streets. It was a wonder to them—those spacious reaches of open
      country to run and dance and tumble and frolic in, after their dull and
      joyless captivity; so they scampered far and wide over the fair regions on
      both sides of the river, and came back at eventide weary, but laden with
      flowers and flushed with new health drawn from the fresh country air and
      the vigorous exercise.
    </p>
    <p>
      After the burnings, the grown folk followed Joan from church to church and
      put in the day in thanksgivings for the city’s deliverance, and at night
      they feted her and her generals and illuminated the town, and high and low
      gave themselves up to festivities and rejoicings. By the time the populace
      were fairly in bed, toward dawn, we were in the saddle and away toward
      Tours to report to the King.
    </p>
    <p>
      That was a march which would have turned any one’s head but Joan’s. We
      moved between emotional ranks of grateful country-people all the way. They
      crowded about Joan to touch her feet, her horse, her armor, and they even
      knelt in the road and kissed her horse’s hoof-prints.
    </p>
    <p>
      The land was full of her praises. The most illustrious chiefs of the
      church wrote to the King extolling the Maid, comparing her to the saints
      and heroes of the Bible, and warning him not to let “unbelief,
      ingratitude, or other injustice” hinder or impair the divine help sent
      through her. One might think there was a touch of prophecy in that, and we
      will let it go at that; but to my mind it had its inspiration in those
      great men’s accurate knowledge of the King’s trivial and treacherous
      character.
    </p>
    <p>
      The King had come to Tours to meet Joan. At the present day this poor
      thing is called Charles the Victorious, on account of victories which
      other people won for him, but in our time we had a private name for him
      which described him better, and was sanctified to him by personal
      deserving—Charles the Base. When we entered the presence he sat
      throned, with his tinseled snobs and dandies around him. He looked like a
      forked carrot, so tightly did his clothing fit him from his waist down; he
      wore shoes with a rope-like pliant toe a foot long that had to be hitched
      up to the knee to keep it out of the way; he had on a crimson velvet cape
      that came no lower than his elbows; on his head he had a tall felt thing
      like a thimble, with a feather it its jeweled band that stuck up like a
      pen from an inkhorn, and from under that thimble his bush of stiff hair
      stuck down to his shoulders, curving outward at the bottom, so that the
      cap and the hair together made the head like a shuttlecock. All the
      materials of his dress were rich, and all the colors brilliant. In his lap
      he cuddled a miniature greyhound that snarled, lifting its lip and showing
      its white teeth whenever any slight movement disturbed it. The King’s
      dandies were dressed in about the same fashion as himself, and when I
      remembered that Joan had called the war-council of Orleans “disguised
      ladies’ maids,” it reminded me of people who squander all their money on a
      trifle and then haven’t anything to invest when they come across a better
      chance; that name ought to have been saved for these creatures.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan fell on her knees before the majesty of France, and the other
      frivolous animal in his lap—a sight which it pained me to see. What
      had that man done for his country or for anybody in it, that she or any
      other person should kneel to him? But she—she had just done the only
      great deed that had been done for France in fifty years, and had
      consecrated it with the libation of her blood. The positions should have
      been reversed.
    </p>
    <p>
      However, to be fair, one must grant that Charles acquitted himself very
      well for the most part, on that occasion—very much better than he
      was in the habit of doing. He passed his pup to a courtier, and took off
      his cap to Joan as if she had been a queen. Then he stepped from his
      throne and raised her, and showed quite a spirited and manly joy and
      gratitude in welcoming her and thanking her for her extraordinary
      achievement in his service. My prejudices are of a later date than that.
      If he had continued as he was at that moment, I should not have acquired
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      He acted handsomely. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You shall not kneel to me, my matchless General; you have wrought
      royally, and royal courtesies are your due.” Noticing that she was pale,
      he said, “But you must not stand; you have lost blood for France, and your
      wound is yet green—come.” He led her to a seat and sat down by her.
      “Now, then, speak out frankly, as to one who owes you much and freely
      confesses it before all this courtly assemblage. What shall be your
      reward? Name it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was ashamed of him. And yet that was not fair, for how could he be
      expected to know this marvelous child in these few weeks, when we who
      thought we had known her all her life were daily seeing the clouds uncover
      some new altitudes of her character whose existence was not suspected by
      us before? But we are all that way: when we know a thing we have only
      scorn for other people who don’t happen to know it. And I was ashamed of
      these courtiers, too, for the way they licked their chops, so to speak, as
      envying Joan her great chance, they not knowing her any better than the
      King did. A blush began to rise in Joan’s cheeks at the thought that she
      was working for her country for pay, and she dropped her head and tried to
      hide her face, as girls always do when they find themselves blushing; no
      one knows why they do, but they do, and the more they blush the more they
      fail to get reconciled to it, and the more they can’t bear to have people
      look at them when they are doing it. The King made it a great deal worse
      by calling attention to it, which is the unkindest thing a person can do
      when a girl is blushing; sometimes, when there is a big crowd of
      strangers, it is even likely to make her cry if she is as young as Joan
      was. God knows the reason for this, it is hidden from men. As for me, I
      would as soon blush as sneeze; in fact, I would rather. However, these
      meditations are not of consequence: I will go on with what I was saying.
      The King rallied her for blushing, and this brought up the rest of the
      blood and turned her face to fire. Then he was sorry, seeing what he had
      done, and tried to make her comfortable by saying the blush was exceeding
      becoming to her and not to mind it—which caused even the dog to
      notice it now, so of course the red in Joan’s face turned to purple, and
      the tears overflowed and ran down—I could have told anybody that
      that would happen. The King was distressed, and saw that the best thing to
      do would be to get away from this subject, so he began to say the finest
      kind of things about Joan’s capture of the Tourelles, and presently when
      she was more composed he mentioned the reward again and pressed her to
      name it. Everybody listened with anxious interest to hear what her claim
      was going to be, but when her answer came their faces showed that the
      thing she asked for was not what they had been expecting.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, dear and gracious Dauphin, I have but one desire—only one. If—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Do not be afraid, my child—name it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That you will not delay a day. My army is strong and valiant, and eager
      to finish its work—march with me to Rheims and receive your crown.”
       You could see the indolent King shrink, in his butterfly clothes.
    </p>
    <p>
      “To Rheims—oh, impossible, my General! We march through the heart of
      England’s power?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Could those be French faces there? Not one of them lighted in response to
      the girl’s brave proposition, but all promptly showed satisfaction in the
      King’s objection. Leave this silken idleness for the rude contact of war?
      None of these butterflies desired that. They passed their jeweled
      comfit-boxes one to another and whispered their content in the head
      butterfly’s practical prudence. Joan pleaded with the King, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, I pray you do not throw away this perfect opportunity. Everything is
      favorable—everything. It is as if the circumstances were specially
      made for it. The spirits of our army are exalted with victory, those of
      the English forces depressed by defeat. Delay will change this. Seeing us
      hesitate to follow up our advantage, our men will wonder, doubt, lose
      confidence, and the English will wonder, gather courage, and be bold
      again. Now is the time—pritheee let us march!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The King shook his head, and La Tremouille, being asked for an opinion,
      eagerly furnished it:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Sire, all prudence is against it. Think of the English strongholds along
      the Loire; think of those that lie between us and Rheims!”
     </p>
    <p>
      He was going on, but Joan cut him short, and said, turning to him:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If we wait, they will all be strengthened, reinforced. Will that
      advantage us?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why—no.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then what is your suggestion?—what is it that you would propose to
      do?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “My judgment is to wait.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Wait for what?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The minister was obliged to hesitate, for he knew of no explanation that
      would sound well. Moreover, he was not used to being catechized in this
      fashion, with the eyes of a crowd of people on him, so he was irritated,
      and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Matters of state are not proper matters for public discussion.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan said placidly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have to beg your pardon. My trespass came of ignorance. I did not know
      that matters connected with your department of the government were matters
      of state.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The minister lifted his brows in amused surprise, and said, with a touch
      of sarcasm:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I am the King’s chief minister, and yet you had the impression that
      matters connected with my department are not matters of state? Pray, how
      is that?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan replied, indifferently:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Because there is no state.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No state!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No, sir, there is no state, and no use for a minister. France is shrunk
      to a couple of acres of ground; a sheriff’s constable could take care of
      it; its affairs are not matters of state. The term is too large.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The King did not blush, but burst into a hearty, careless laugh, and the
      court laughed too, but prudently turned its head and did it silently. La
      Tremouille was angry, and opened his mouth to speak, but the King put up
      his hand, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There—I take her under the royal protection. She has spoken the
      truth, the ungilded truth—how seldom I hear it! With all this tinsel
      on me and all this tinsel about me, I am but a sheriff after all—a
      poor shabby two-acre sheriff—and you are but a constable,” and he
      laughed his cordial laugh again. “Joan, my frank, honest General, will you
      name your reward? I would ennoble you. You shall quarter the crown and the
      lilies of France for blazon, and with them your victorious sword to defend
      them—speak the word.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made an eager buzz of surprise and envy in the assemblage, but Joan
      shook her head and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, I cannot, dear and noble Dauphin. To be allowed to work for France,
      to spend one’s self for France, is itself so supreme a reward that nothing
      can add to it—nothing. Give me the one reward I ask, the dearest of
      all rewards, the highest in your gift—march with me to Rheims and
      receive your crown. I will beg it on my knees.”
     </p>
    <p>
      But the King put his hand on her arm, and there was a really brave
      awakening in his voice and a manly fire in his eye when he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “No, sit. You have conquered me—it shall be as you—”
     </p>
    <p>
      But a warning sign from his minister halted him, and he added, to the
      relief of the court:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Well, well, we will think of it, we will think it over and see. Does that
      content you, impulsive little soldier?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The first part of the speech sent a glow of delight to Joan’s face, but
      the end of it quenched it and she looked sad, and the tears gathered in
      her eyes. After a moment she spoke out with what seemed a sort of
      terrified impulse, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, use me; I beseech you, use me—there is but little time!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But little time?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Only a year—I shall last only a year.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why, child, there are fifty good years in that compact little body yet.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, you err, indeed you do. In one little year the end will come. Ah, the
      time is so short, so short; the moments are flying, and so much to be
      done. Oh, use me, and quickly—it is life or death for France.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Even those insects were sobered by her impassioned words. The King looked
      very grave—grave, and strongly impressed. His eyes lit suddenly with
      an eloquent fire, and he rose and drew his sword and raised it aloft; then
      he brought it slowly down upon Joan’s shoulder and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, thou art so simple, so true, so great, so noble—and by this
      accolade I join thee to the nobility of France, thy fitting place! And for
      thy sake I do hereby ennoble all thy family and all thy kin; and all their
      descendants born in wedlock, not only in the male but also in the female
      line. And more!—more! To distinguish thy house and honor it above
      all others, we add a privilege never accorded to any before in the history
      of these dominions: the females of thy line shall have and hold the right
      to ennoble their husbands when these shall be of inferior degree.”
       [Astonishment and envy flared up in every countenance when the words were
      uttered which conferred this extraordinary grace. The King paused and
      looked around upon these signs with quite evident satisfaction.] “Rise,
      Joan of Arc, now and henceforth surnamed Du Lis, in grateful
      acknowledgment of the good blow which you have struck for the lilies of
      France; and they, and the royal crown, and your own victorious sword, fit
      and fair company for each other, shall be grouped in you escutcheon and be
      and remain the symbol of your high nobility forever.”
     </p>
    <p>
      As my Lady Du Lis rose, the gilded children of privilege pressed forward
      to welcome her to their sacred ranks and call her by her new name; but she
      was troubled, and said these honors were not meet for one of her lowly
      birth and station, and by their kind grace she would remain simple Joan of
      Arc, nothing more—and so be called.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nothing more! As if there could be anything more, anything higher,
      anything greater. My Lady Du Lis—why, it was tinsel, petty,
      perishable. But, JOAN OF ARC! The mere sound of it sets one’s pulses
      leaping.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 24 Tinsel Trappings of Nobility
    </h3>
    <p>
      IT WAS vexatious to see what a to-do the whole town, and next the whole
      country, made over the news. Joan of Arc ennobled by the King! People went
      dizzy with wonder and delight over it. You cannot imagine how she was
      gaped at, stared at, envied. Why, one would have supposed that some great
      and fortunate thing had happened to her. But we did not think any great
      things of it. To our minds no mere human hand could add a glory to Joan of
      Arc. To us she was the sun soaring in the heavens, and her new nobility a
      candle atop of it; to us it was swallowed up and lost in her own light.
      And she was as indifferent to it and as unconscious of it as the other sun
      would have been.
    </p>
    <p>
      But it was different with her brothers. They were proud and happy in their
      new dignity, which was quite natural. And Joan was glad it had been
      conferred, when she saw how pleased they were. It was a clever thought in
      the King to outflank her scruples by marching on them under shelter of her
      love for her family and her kin.
    </p>
    <p>
      Jean and Pierre sported their coats-of-arms right away; and their society
      was courted by everybody, the nobles and commons alike. The
      Standard-Bearer said, with some touch of bitterness, that he could see
      that they just felt good to be alive, they were so soaked with the comfort
      of their glory; and didn’t like to sleep at all, because when they were
      asleep they didn’t know they were noble, and so sleep was a clean loss of
      time. And then he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “They can’t take precedence of me in military functions and state
      ceremonies, but when it comes to civil ones and society affairs I judge
      they’ll cuddle coolly in behind you and the knights, and Noel and I will
      have to walk behind them—hey?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes,” I said, “I think you are right.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I was just afraid of it—just afraid of it,” said the
      Standard-Bearer, with a sigh. “Afraid of it? I’m talking like a fool; of
      course I knew it. Yes, I was talking like a fool.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Noel Rainguesson said, musingly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, I noticed something natural about the tone of it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      We others laughed.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, you did, did you? You think you are very clever, don’t you? I’ll take
      and wring your neck for you one of these days, Noel Rainguesson.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Sieur de Metz said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Paladin, your fears haven’t reached the top notch. They are away below
      the grand possibilities. Didn’t it occur to you that in civil and society
      functions they will take precedence of all the rest of the personal staff—every
      one of us?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, come!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You’ll find it’s so. Look at their escutcheon. Its chiefest feature is
      the lilies of France. It’s royal, man, royal—do you understand the
      size of that? The lilies are there by authority of the King—do you
      understand the size of that? Though not in detail and in entirety, they do
      nevertheless substantially quarter the arms of France in their coat.
      Imagine it! consider it! measure the magnitude of it! We walk in front of
      those boys? Bless you, we’ve done that for the last time. In my opinion
      there isn’t a lay lord in this whole region that can walk in front of
      them, except the Duke d’Alencon, prince of the blood.”
     </p>
    <p>
      You could have knocked the Paladin down with a feather. He seemed to
      actually turn pale. He worked his lips a moment without getting anything
      out; then it came:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I didn’t know that, nor the half of it; how could I? I’ve been an idiot.
      I see it now—I’ve been an idiot. I met them this morning, and sung
      out hello to them just as I would to anybody. I didn’t mean to be
      ill-mannered, but I didn’t know the half of this that you’ve been telling.
      I’ve been an ass. Yes, that is all there is to it—I’ve been an ass.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Noel Rainguesson said, in a kind of weary way:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, that is likely enough; but I don’t see why you should seem surprised
      at it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You don’t, don’t you? Well, why don’t you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Because I don’t see any novelty about it. With some people it is a
      condition which is present all the time. Now you take a condition which is
      present all the time, and the results of that condition will be uniform;
      this uniformity of result will in time become monotonous; monotonousness,
      by the law of its being, is fatiguing. If you had manifested fatigue upon
      noticing that you had been an ass, that would have been logical, that
      would have been rational; whereas it seems to me that to manifest surprise
      was to be again an ass, because the condition of intellect that can enable
      a person to be surprised and stirred by inert monotonousness is a—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Now that is enough, Noel Rainguesson; stop where you are, before you get
      yourself into trouble. And don’t bother me any more for some days or a
      week an it please you, for I cannot abide your clack.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Come, I like that! I didn’t want to talk. I tried to get out of talking.
      If you didn’t want to hear my clack, what did you keep intruding your
      conversation on me for?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I? I never dreamed of such a thing.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Well, you did it, anyway. And I have a right to feel hurt, and I do feel
      hurt, to have you treat me so. It seems to me that when a person goads,
      and crowds, and in a manner forces another person to talk, it is neither
      very fair nor very good-mannered to call what he says clack.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, snuffle—do! and break your heart, you poor thing. Somebody
      fetch this sick doll a sugar-rag. Look you, Sir Jean de Metz, do you feel
      absolutely certain about that thing?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What thing?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why, that Jean and Pierre are going to take precedence of all the lay
      noblesse hereabouts except the Duke d’Alencon?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I think there is not a doubt of it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Standard-Bearer was deep in thoughts and dreams a few moments, then
      the silk-and-velvet expanse of his vast breast rose and fell with a sigh,
      and he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Dear, dear, what a lift it is! It just shows what luck can do. Well, I
      don’t care. I shouldn’t care to be a painted accident—I shouldn’t
      value it. I am prouder to have climbed up to where I am just by sheer
      natural merit than I would be to ride the very sun in the zenith and have
      to reflect that I was nothing but a poor little accident, and got shot up
      there out of somebody else’s catapult. To me, merit is everything—in
      fact, the only thing. All else is dross.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Just then the bugles blew the assembly, and that cut our talk short.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 25 At Last—Forward!
    </h3>
    <p>
      THE DAYS began to waste away—and nothing decided, nothing done. The
      army was full of zeal, but it was also hungry. It got no pay, the treasury
      was getting empty, it was becoming impossible to feed it; under pressure
      of privation it began to fall apart and disperse—which pleased the
      trifling court exceedingly. Joan’s distress was pitiful to see. She was
      obliged to stand helpless while her victorious army dissolved away until
      hardly the skeleton of it was left.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last one day she went to the Castle of Loches, where the King was
      idling. She found him consulting with three of his councilors, Robert le
      Maton, a former Chancellor of France, Christophe d’Harcourt, and Gerard
      Machet. The Bastard of Orleans was present also, and it is through him
      that we know what happened. Joan threw herself at the King’s feet and
      embraced his knees, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Noble Dauphin, prithee hold no more of these long and numerous councils,
      but come, and come quickly, to Rheims and receive your crown.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Christophe d’Harcourt asked:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Is it your Voices that command you to say that to the King?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, and urgently.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then will you not tell us in the King’s presence in what way the Voices
      communicate with you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was another sly attempt to trap Joan into indiscreet admissions and
      dangerous pretensions. But nothing came of it. Joan’s answer was simple
      and straightforward, and the smooth Bishop was not able to find any fault
      with it. She said that when she met with people who doubted the truth of
      her mission she went aside and prayed, complaining of the distrust of
      these, and then the comforting Voices were heard at her ear saying, soft
      and low, “Go forward, Daughter of God, and I will help thee.” Then she
      added, “When I hear that, the joy in my heart, oh, it is insupportable!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Bastard said that when she said these words her face lit up as with a
      flame, and she was like one in an ecstasy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan pleaded, persuaded, reasoned; gaining ground little by little, but
      opposed step by step by the council. She begged, she implored, leave to
      march. When they could answer nothing further, they granted that perhaps
      it had been a mistake to let the army waste away, but how could we help it
      now? how could we march without an army?
    </p>
    <p>
      “Raise one!” said Joan.
    </p>
    <p>
      “But it will take six weeks.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No matter—begin! let us begin!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is too late. Without doubt the Duke of Bedford has been gathering
      troops to push to the succor of his strongholds on the Loire.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, while we have been disbanding ours—and pity ’tis. But we must
      throw away no more time; we must bestir ourselves.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The King objected that he could not venture toward Rheims with those
      strong places on the Loire in his path. But Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “We will break them up. Then you can march.”
     </p>
    <p>
      With that plan the King was willing to venture assent. He could sit around
      out of danger while the road was being cleared.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan came back in great spirits. Straightway everything was stirring.
      Proclamations were issued calling for men, a recruiting-camp was
      established at Selles in Berry, and the commons and the nobles began to
      flock to it with enthusiasm.
    </p>
    <p>
      A deal of the month of May had been wasted; and yet by the 6th of June
      Joan had swept together a new army and was ready to march. She had eight
      thousand men. Think of that. Think of gathering together such a body as
      that in that little region. And these were veteran soldiers, too. In fact,
      most of the men in France were soldiers, when you came to that; for the
      wars had lasted generations now. Yes, most Frenchmen were soldiers; and
      admirable runners, too, both by practice and inheritance; they had done
      next to nothing but run for near a century. But that was not their fault.
      They had had no fair and proper leadership—at least leaders with a
      fair and proper chance. Away back, King and Court got the habit of being
      treacherous to the leaders; then the leaders easily got the habit of
      disobeying the King and going their own way, each for himself and nobody
      for the lot. Nobody could win victories that way. Hence, running became
      the habit of the French troops, and no wonder. Yet all that those troops
      needed in order to be good fighters was a leader who would attend strictly
      to business—a leader with all authority in his hands in place of a
      tenth of it along with nine other generals equipped with an equal tenth
      apiece. They had a leader rightly clothed with authority now, and with a
      head and heart bent on war of the most intensely businesslike and earnest
      sort—and there would be results. No doubt of that. They had Joan of
      Arc; and under that leadership their legs would lose the art and mystery
      of running.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, Joan was in great spirits. She was here and there and everywhere, all
      over the camp, by day and by night, pushing things. And wherever she came
      charging down the lines, reviewing the troops, it was good to hear them
      break out and cheer. And nobody could help cheering, she was such a vision
      of young bloom and beauty and grace, and such an incarnation of pluck and
      life and go! she was growing more and more ideally beautiful every day, as
      was plain to be seen—and these were days of development; for she was
      well past seventeen now—in fact, she was getting close upon
      seventeen and a half—indeed, just a little woman, as you may say.
    </p>
    <p>
      The two young Counts de Laval arrived one day—fine young fellows
      allied to the greatest and most illustrious houses of France; and they
      could not rest till they had seen Joan of Arc. So the King sent for them
      and presented them to her, and you may believe she filled the bill of
      their expectations. When they heard that rich voice of hers they must have
      thought it was a flute; and when they saw her deep eyes and her face, and
      the soul that looked out of that face, you could see that the sight of her
      stirred them like a poem, like lofty eloquence, like martial music. One of
      them wrote home to his people, and in his letter he said, “It seemed
      something divine to see her and hear her.” Ah, yes, and it was a true
      word. Truer word was never spoken.
    </p>
    <p>
      He saw her when she was ready to begin her march and open the campaign,
      and this is what he said about it:
    </p>
    <p>
      “She was clothed all in white armor save her head, and in her hand she
      carried a little battle-ax; and when she was ready to mount her great
      black horse he reared and plunged and would not let her. Then she said,
      ‘Lead him to the cross.’ This cross was in front of the church close by.
      So they led him there. Then she mounted, and he never budged, any more
      than if he had been tied. Then she turned toward the door of the church
      and said, in her soft womanly voice, ‘You, priests and people of the
      Church, make processions and pray to God for us!’ Then she spurred away,
      under her standard, with her little ax in her hand, crying ‘Forward—march!’
      One of her brothers, who came eight days ago, departed with her; and he
      also was clad all in white armor.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was there, and I saw it, too; saw it all, just as he pictures it. And I
      see it yet—the little battle-ax, the dainty plumed cap, the white
      armor—all in the soft June afternoon; I see it just as if it were
      yesterday. And I rode with the staff—the personal staff—the
      staff of Joan of Arc.
    </p>
    <p>
      That young count was dying to go, too, but the King held him back for the
      present. But Joan had made him a promise. In his letter he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “She told me that when the King starts for Rheims I shall go with him. But
      God grant I may not have to wait till then, but may have a part in the
      battles!”
     </p>
    <p>
      She made him that promise when she was taking leave of my lady the Duchess
      d’Alencon. The duchess was exacting a promise, so it seemed a proper time
      for others to do the like. The duchess was troubled for her husband, for
      she foresaw desperate fighting; and she held Joan to her breast, and
      stroked her hair lovingly, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You must watch over him, dear, and take care of him, and send him back to
      me safe. I require it of you; I will not let you go till you promise.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I give you the promise with all my heart; and it is not just words, it is
      a promise; you shall have him back without a hurt. Do you believe? And are
      you satisfied with me now?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The duchess could not speak, but she kissed Joan on the forehead; and so
      they parted.
    </p>
    <p>
      We left on the 6th and stopped over at Romorantin; then on the 9th Joan
      entered Orleans in state, under triumphal arches, with the welcoming
      cannon thundering and seas of welcoming flags fluttering in the breeze.
      The Grand Staff rode with her, clothed in shining splendors of costume and
      decorations: the Duke d’Alencon; the Bastard of Orleans; the Sire de
      Boussac, Marshal of France; the Lord de Granville, Master of the
      Crossbowmen; the Sire de Culan, Admiral of France; Ambroise de Lor;
      Etienne de Vignoles, called La Hire; Gautier de Brusac, and other
      illustrious captains.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was grand times; the usual shoutings and packed multitudes, the usual
      crush to get sight of Joan; but at last we crowded through to our old
      lodgings, and I saw old Boucher and the wife and that dear Catherine
      gather Joan to their hearts and smother her with kisses—and my heart
      ached for her so! for I could have kissed Catherine better than anybody,
      and more and longer; yet was not thought of for that office, and I so
      famished for it. Ah, she was so beautiful, and oh, so sweet! I had loved
      her the first day I ever saw her, and from that day forth she was sacred
      to me. I have carried her image in my heart for sixty-three years—all
      lonely thee, yes, solitary, for it never has had company—and I am
      grown so old, so old; but it, oh, it is as fresh and young and merry and
      mischievous and lovely and sweet and pure and witching and divine as it
      was when it crept in there, bringing benediction and peace to its
      habitation so long ago, so long ago—for it has not aged a day!
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 26 The Last Doubts Scattered
    </h3>
    <p>
      THIS TIME, as before, the King’s last command to the generals was this:
      “See to it that you do nothing without the sanction of the Maid.” And this
      time the command was obeyed; and would continue to be obeyed all through
      the coming great days of the Loire campaign.
    </p>
    <p>
      That was a change! That was new! It broke the traditions. It shows you
      what sort of a reputation as a commander-in-chief the child had made for
      herself in ten days in the field. It was a conquering of men’s doubts and
      suspicions and a capturing and solidifying of men’s belief and confidence
      such as the grayest veteran on the Grand Staff had not been able to
      achieve in thirty years. Don’t you remember that when at sixteen Joan
      conducted her own case in a grim court of law and won it, the old judge
      spoke of her as “this marvelous child”? It was the right name, you see.
    </p>
    <p>
      These veterans were not going to branch out and do things without the
      sanction of the Maid—that is true; and it was a great gain. But at
      the same time there were some among them who still trembled at her new and
      dashing war tactics and earnestly desired to modify them. And so, during
      the 10th, while Joan was slaving away at her plans and issuing order after
      order with tireless industry, the old-time consultations and arguings and
      speechifyings were going on among certain of the generals.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the afternoon of that day they came in a body to hold one of these
      councils of war; and while they waited for Joan to join them they
      discussed the situation. Now this discussion is not set down in the
      histories; but I was there, and I will speak of it, as knowing you will
      trust me, I not being given to beguiling you with lies.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gautier de Brusac was spokesman for the timid ones; Joan’s side was
      resolutely upheld by d’Alencon, the Bastard, La Hire, the Admiral of
      France, the Marshal de Boussac, and all the other really important chiefs.
    </p>
    <p>
      De Brusac argued that the situation was very grave; that Jargeau, the
      first point of attack, was formidably strong; its imposing walls bristling
      with artillery; with seven thousand picked English veterans behind them,
      and at their head the great Earl of Suffolk and his two redoubtable
      brothers, the De la Poles. It seemed to him that the proposal of Joan of
      Arc to try to take such a place by storm was a most rash and over-daring
      idea, and she ought to be persuaded to relinquish it in favor of the
      soberer and safer procedure of investment by regular siege. It seemed to
      him that this fiery and furious new fashion of hurling masses of men
      against impregnable walls of stone, in defiance of the established laws
      and usages of war, was—
    </p>
    <p>
      But he got no further. La Hire gave his plumed helm an impatient toss and
      burst out with:
    </p>
    <p>
      “By God, she knows her trade, and none can teach it her!”
     </p>
    <p>
      And before he could get out anything more, D’Alencon was on his feet, and
      the Bastard of Orleans, and a half a dozen others, all thundering at once,
      and pouring out their indignant displeasure upon any and all that might
      hold, secretly or publicly, distrust of the wisdom of the
      Commander-in-Chief. And when they had said their say, La Hire took a
      chance again, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There are some that never know how to change. Circumstances may change,
      but those people are never able to see that they have got to change too,
      to meet those circumstances. All that they know is the one beaten track
      that their fathers and grandfathers have followed and that they themselves
      have followed in their turn. If an earthquake come and rip the land to
      chaos, and that beaten track now lead over precipices and into morasses,
      those people can’t learn that they must strike out a new road—no;
      they will march stupidly along and follow the old one, to death and
      perdition. Men, there’s a new state of things; and a surpassing military
      genius has perceived it with her clear eye. And a new road is required,
      and that same clear eye has noted where it must go, and has marked it out
      for us. The man does not live, never has lived, never will live, that can
      improve upon it! The old state of things was defeat, defeat, defeat—and
      by consequence we had troops with no dash, no heart, no hope. Would you
      assault stone walls with such? No—there was but one way with that
      kind: sit down before a place and wait, wait—starve it out, if you
      could. The new case is the very opposite; it is this: men all on fire with
      pluck and dash and vim and fury and energy—a restrained
      conflagration! What would you do with it? Hold it down and let it smolder
      and perish and go out? What would Joan of Arc do with it? Turn it loose,
      by the Lord God of heaven and earth, and let it swallow up the foe in the
      whirlwind of its fires! Nothing shows the splendor and wisdom of her
      military genius like her instant comprehension of the size of the change
      which has come about, and her instant perception of the right and only
      right way to take advantage of it. With her is no sitting down and
      starving out; no dilly-dallying and fooling around; no lazying, loafing,
      and going to sleep; no, it is storm! storm! storm! and still storm! storm!
      storm! and forever storm! storm! storm! hunt the enemy to his hole, then
      turn her French hurricanes loose and carry him by storm! And that is my
      sort! Jargeau? What of Jargeau, with its battlements and towers, its
      devastating artillery, its seven thousand picked veterans? Joan of Arc is
      to the fore, and by the splendor of God its fate is sealed!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Oh, he carried them. There was not another word said about persuading Joan
      to change her tactics. They sat talking comfortably enough after that.
    </p>
    <p>
      By and by Joan entered, and they rose and saluted with their swords, and
      she asked what their pleasure might be. La Hire said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is settled, my General. The matter concerned Jargeau. There were some
      who thought we could not take the place.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan laughed her pleasant laugh, her merry, carefree laugh; the laugh that
      rippled so buoyantly from her lips and made old people feel young again to
      hear it; and she said to the company:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Have no fears—indeed, there is no need nor any occasion for them.
      We will strike the English boldly by assault, and you will see.” Then a
      faraway look came into her eyes, and I think that a picture of her home
      drifted across the vision of her mind; for she said very gently, and as
      one who muses, “But that I know God guides us and will give us success, I
      had liefer keep sheep than endure these perils.”
     </p>
    <p>
      We had a homelike farewell supper that evening—just the personal
      staff and the family. Joan had to miss it; for the city had given a
      banquet in her honor, and she had gone there in state with the Grand
      Staff, through a riot of joy-bells and a sparkling Milky Way of
      illuminations.
    </p>
    <p>
      After supper some lively young folk whom we knew came in, and we presently
      forgot that we were soldiers, and only remembered that we were boys and
      girls and full of animal spirits and long-pent fun; and so there was
      dancing, and games, and romps, and screams of laughter—just as
      extravagant and innocent and noisy a good time as ever I had in my life.
      Dear, dear, how long ago it was!—and I was young then. And outside,
      all the while, was the measured tramp of marching battalions, belated odds
      and ends of the French power gathering for the morrow’s tragedy on the
      grim stage of war. Yes, in those days we had those contrasts side by side.
      And as I passed along to bed there was another one: the big Dwarf, in
      brave new armor, sat sentry at Joan’s door—the stern Spirit of War
      made flesh, as it were—and on his ample shoulder was curled a kitten
      asleep.
    </p>
    <h3>
      Chapter 27 How Joan Took Jargeau
    </h3>

    <p>
      WE MADE a gallant show next day when we filed out through the frowning
      gates of Orleans, with banners flying and Joan and the Grand Staff in the
      van of the long column. Those two young De Lavals were come now, and were
      joined to the Grand Staff. Which was well; war being their proper trade,
      for they were grandsons of that illustrious fighter Bertrand du Guesclin,
      Constable of France in earlier days. Louis de Bourbon, the Marshal de
      Rais, and the Vidame de Chartres were added also. We had a right to feel a
      little uneasy, for we knew that a force of five thousand men was on its
      way under Sir John Fastolfe to reinforce Jargeau, but I think we were not
      uneasy, nevertheless. In truth, that force was not yet in our
      neighborhood. Sir John was loitering; for some reason or other he was not
      hurrying. He was losing precious time—four days at Etampes, and four
      more at Janville.
    </p>
    <p>
      We reached Jargeau and began business at once. Joan sent forward a heavy
      force which hurled itself against the outworks in handsome style, and
      gained a footing and fought hard to keep it; but it presently began to
      fall back before a sortie from the city. Seeing this, Joan raised her
      battle-cry and led a new assault herself under a furious artillery fire.
      The Paladin was struck down at her side wounded, but she snatched her
      standard from his failing hand and plunged on through the ruck of flying
      missiles, cheering her men with encouraging cries; and then for a good
      time one had turmoil, and clash of steel, and collision and confusion of
      struggling multitudes, and the hoarse bellowing of the guns; and then the
      hiding of it all under a rolling firmament of smoke—a firmament
      through which veiled vacancies appeared for a moment now and then, giving
      fitful dim glimpses of the wild tragedy enacting beyond; and always at
      these times one caught sight of that slight figure in white mail which was
      the center and soul of our hope and trust, and whenever we saw that, with
      its back to us and its face to the fight, we knew that all was well. At
      last a great shout went up—a joyous roar of shoutings, in fact—and
      that was sign sufficient that the faubourgs were ours.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, they were ours; the enemy had been driven back within the walls. On
      the ground which Joan had won we camped; for night was coming on.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan sent a summons to the English, promising that if they surrendered she
      would allow them to go in peace and take their horses with them. Nobody
      knew that she could take that strong place, but she knew it—knew it
      well; yet she offered that grace—offered it in a time when such a
      thing was unknown in war; in a time when it was custom and usage to
      massacre the garrison and the inhabitants of captured cities without pity
      or compunction—yes, even to the harmless women and children
      sometimes. There are neighbors all about you who well remember the
      unspeakable atrocities which Charles the Bold inflicted upon the men and
      women and children of Dinant when he took that place some years ago. It
      was a unique and kindly grace which Joan offered that garrison; but that
      was her way, that was her loving and merciful nature—she always did
      her best to save her enemy’s life and his soldierly pride when she had the
      mastery of him.
    </p>
    <p>
      The English asked fifteen days’ armistice to consider the proposal in. And
      Fastolfe coming with five thousand men! Joan said no. But she offered
      another grace: they might take both their horses and their side-arms—but
      they must go within the hour.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, those bronzed English veterans were pretty hard-headed folk. They
      declined again. Then Joan gave command that her army be made ready to move
      to the assault at nine in the morning. Considering the deal of marching
      and fighting which the men had done that day, D’Alencon thought the hour
      rather early; but Joan said it was best so, and so must be obeyed. Then
      she burst out with one of those enthusiasms which were always burning in
      her when battle was imminent, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Work! work! and God will work with us!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Yes, one might say that her motto was “Work! stick to it; keep on
      working!” for in war she never knew what indolence was. And whoever will
      take that motto and live by it will likely to succeed. There’s many a way
      to win in this world, but none of them is worth much without good hard
      work back out of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      I think we should have lost our big Standard-Bearer that day, if our
      bigger Dwarf had not been at hand to bring him out of the melee when he
      was wounded. He was unconscious, and would have been trampled to death by
      our own horse, if the Dwarf had not promptly rescued him and haled him to
      the rear and safety. He recovered, and was himself again after two or
      three hours; and then he was happy and proud, and made the most of his
      wound, and went swaggering around in his bandages showing off like an
      innocent big-child—which was just what he was. He was prouder of
      being wounded than a really modest person would be of being killed. But
      there was no harm in his vanity, and nobody minded it. He said he was hit
      by a stone from a catapult—a stone the size of a man’s head. But the
      stone grew, of course. Before he got through with it he was claiming that
      the enemy had flung a building at him.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Let him alone,” said Noel Rainguesson. “Don’t interrupt his processes.
      To-morrow it will be a cathedral.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He said that privately. And, sure enough, to-morrow it was a cathedral. I
      never saw anybody with such an abandoned imagination.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan was abroad at the crack of dawn, galloping here and there and yonder,
      examining the situation minutely, and choosing what she considered the
      most effective positions for her artillery; and with such accurate
      judgment did she place her guns that her Lieutenant-General’s admiration
      of it still survived in his memory when his testimony was taken at the
      Rehabilitation, a quarter of a century later.
    </p>
    <p>
      In this testimony the Duke d’Alencon said that at Jargeau that morning of
      the 12th of June she made her dispositions not like a novice, but “with
      the sure and clear judgment of a trained general of twenty or thirty
      years’ experience.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The veteran captains of the armies of France said she was great in war in
      all ways, but greatest of all in her genius for posting and handling
      artillery.
    </p>
    <p>
      Who taught the shepherd-girl to do these marvels—she who could not
      read, and had had no opportunity to study the complex arts of war? I do
      not know any way to solve such a baffling riddle as that, there being no
      precedent for it, nothing in history to compare it with and examine it by.
      For in history there is no great general, however gifted, who arrived at
      success otherwise than through able teaching and hard study and some
      experience. It is a riddle which will never be guessed. I think these vast
      powers and capacities were born in her, and that she applied them by an
      intuition which could not err.
    </p>
    <p>
      At eight o’clock all movement ceased, and with it all sounds, all noise. A
      mute expectancy reigned. The stillness was something awful—because
      it meant so much. There was no air stirring. The flags on the towers and
      ramparts hung straight down like tassels. Wherever one saw a person, that
      person had stopped what he was doing, and was in a waiting attitude, a
      listening attitude. We were on a commanding spot, clustered around Joan.
      Not far from us, on every hand, were the lanes and humble dwellings of
      these outlying suburbs. Many people were visible—all were listening,
      not one was moving. A man had placed a nail; he was about to fasten
      something with it to the door-post of his shop—but he had stopped.
      There was his hand reaching up holding the nail; and there was his other
      hand in the act of striking with the hammer; but he had forgotten
      everything—his head was turned aside listening. Even children
      unconsciously stopped in their play; I saw a little boy with his
      hoop-stick pointed slanting toward the ground in the act of steering the
      hoop around the corner; and so he had stopped and was listening—the
      hoop was rolling away, doing its own steering. I saw a young girl prettily
      framed in an open window, a watering-pot in her hand and window-boxes of
      red flowers under its spout—but the water had ceased to flow; the
      girl was listening. Everywhere were these impressive petrified forms; and
      everywhere was suspended movement and that awful stillness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan of Arc raised her sword in the air. At the signal, the silence was
      torn to rags; cannon after cannon vomited flames and smoke and delivered
      its quaking thunders; and we saw answering tongues of fire dart from the
      towers and walls of the city, accompanied by answering deep thunders, and
      in a minute the walls and the towers disappeared, and in their place stood
      vast banks and pyramids of snowy smoke, motionless in the dead air. The
      startled girl dropped her watering-pot and clasped her hands together, and
      at that moment a stone cannon-ball crashed through her fair body.
    </p>
    <p>
      The great artillery duel went on, each side hammering away with all its
      might; and it was splendid for smoke and noise, and most exalting to one’s
      spirits. The poor little town around about us suffered cruelly. The
      cannon-balls tore through its slight buildings, wrecking them as if they
      had been built of cards; and every moment or two one would see a huge rock
      come curving through the upper air above the smoke-clouds and go plunging
      down through the roofs. Fire broke out, and columns of flame and smoke
      rose toward the sky.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently the artillery concussions changed the weather. The sky became
      overcast, and a strong wind rose and blew away the smoke that hid the
      English fortresses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then the spectacle was fine; turreted gray walls and towers, and streaming
      bright flags, and jets of red fire and gushes of white smoke in long rows,
      all standing out with sharp vividness against the deep leaden background
      of the sky; and then the whizzing missiles began to knock up the dirt all
      around us, and I felt no more interest in the scenery. There was one
      English gun that was getting our position down finer and finer all the
      time. Presently Joan pointed to it and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Fair duke, step out of your tracks, or that machine will kill you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Duke d’Alencon did as he was bid; but Monsieur du Lude rashly took his
      place, and that cannon tore his head off in a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan was watching all along for the right time to order the assault. At
      last, about nine o’clock, she cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now—to the assault!” and the buglers blew the charge.
    </p>
    <p>
      Instantly we saw the body of men that had been appointed to this service
      move forward toward a point where the concentrated fire of our guns had
      crumbled the upper half of a broad stretch of wall to ruins; we saw this
      force descend into the ditch and begin to plant the scaling-ladders. We
      were soon with them. The Lieutenant-General thought the assault premature.
      But Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, gentle duke, are you afraid? Do you not know that I have promised to
      send you home safe?”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was warm work in the ditches. The walls were crowded with men, and they
      poured avalanches of stones down upon us. There was one gigantic
      Englishman who did us more hurt than any dozen of his brethren. He always
      dominated the places easiest of assault, and flung down exceedingly
      troublesome big stones which smashed men and ladders both—then he
      would near burst himself with laughing over what he had done. But the duke
      settled accounts with him. He went and found the famous cannoneer, Jean le
      Lorrain, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Train your gun—kill me this demon.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He did it with the first shot. He hit the Englishman fair in the breast
      and knocked him backward into the city.
    </p>
    <p>
      The enemy’s resistance was so effective and so stubborn that our people
      began to show signs of doubt and dismay. Seeing this, Joan raised her
      inspiring battle-cry and descended into the fosse herself, the Dwarf
      helping her and the Paladin sticking bravely at her side with the
      standard. She started up a scaling-ladder, but a great stone flung from
      above came crashing down upon her helmet and stretched her, wounded and
      stunned, upon the ground. But only for a moment. The Dwarf stood her upon
      her feet, and straightway she started up the ladder again, crying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “To the assault, friends, to the assault—the English are ours! It is
      the appointed hour!”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a grand rush, and a fierce roar of war-cries, and we swarmed
      over the ramparts like ants. The garrison fled, we pursued; Jargeau was
      ours!
    </p>
    <p>
      The Earl of Suffolk was hemmed in and surrounded, and the Duke d’Alencon
      and the Bastard of Orleans demanded that he surrender himself. But he was
      a proud nobleman and came of a proud race. He refused to yield his sword
      to subordinates, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I will die rather. I will surrender to the Maid of Orleans alone, and to
      no other.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And so he did; and was courteously and honorably used by her.
    </p>
    <p>
      His two brothers retreated, fighting step by step, toward the bridge, we
      pressing their despairing forces and cutting them down by scores. Arrived
      on the bridge, the slaughter still continued. Alexander de la Pole was
      pushed overboard or fell over, and was drowned. Eleven hundred men had
      fallen; John de la Pole decided to give up the struggle. But he was nearly
      as proud and particular as his brother of Suffolk as to whom he would
      surrender to. The French officer nearest at hand was Guillaume Renault,
      who was pressing him closely. Sir John said to him:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Are you a gentleman?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And a knight?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then Sir John knighted him himself there on the bridge, giving him the
      accolade with English coolness and tranquillity in the midst of that storm
      of slaughter and mutilation; and then bowing with high courtesy took the
      sword by the blade and laid the hilt of it in the man’s hand in token of
      surrender. Ah, yes, a proud tribe, those De la Poles.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a grand day, a memorable day, a most splendid victory. We had a
      crowd of prisoners, but Joan would not allow them to be hurt. We took them
      with us and marched into Orleans next day through the usual tempest of
      welcome and joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      And this time there was a new tribute to our leader. From everywhere in
      the packed streets the new recruits squeezed their way to her side to
      touch the sword of Joan of Arc, and draw from it somewhat of that
      mysterious quality which made it invincible.
    </p>
    <h3>
      28 Joan Foretells Her Doom
    </h3>

    <p>
      THE TROOPS must have a rest. Two days would be allowed for this. The
      morning of the 14th I was writing from Joan’s dictation in a small room
      which she sometimes used as a private office when she wanted to get away
      from officials and their interruptions. Catherine Boucher came in and sat
      down and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, dear, I want you to talk to me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Indeed, I am not sorry for that, but glad. What is in your mind?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “This. I scarcely slept last night, for thinking of the dangers you are
      running. The Paladin told me how you made the duke stand out of the way
      when the cannon-balls were flying all about, and so saved his life.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Well, that was right, wasn’t it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Right? Yes; but you stayed there yourself. Why will you do like that? It
      seems such a wanton risk.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, no, it was not so. I was not in any danger.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “How can you say that, Joan, with those deadly things flying all about
      you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan laughed, and tried to turn the subject, but Catherine persisted. She
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It was horribly dangerous, and it could not be necessary to stay in such
      a place. And you led an assault again. Joan, it is tempting Providence. I
      want you to make me a promise. I want you to promise me that you will let
      others lead the assaults, if there must be assaults, and that you will
      take better care of yourself in those dreadful battles. Will you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      But Joan fought away from the promise and did not give it. Catherine sat
      troubled and discontented awhile, then she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, are you going to be a soldier always? These wars are so long—so
      long. They last forever and ever and ever.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a glad flash in Joan’s eye as she cried:
    </p>
    <p>
      “This campaign will do all the really hard work that is in front of it in
      the next four days. The rest of it will be gentler—oh, far less
      bloody. Yes, in four days France will gather another trophy like the
      redemption of Orleans and make her second long step toward freedom!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Catherine started (and so did I); then she gazed long at Joan like one in
      a trance, murmuring “four days—four days,” as if to herself and
      unconsciously. Finally she asked, in a low voice that had something of awe
      in it:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, tell me—how is it that you know that? For you do know it, I
      think.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes,” said Joan, dreamily, “I know—I know. I shall strike—and
      strike again. And before the fourth day is finished I shall strike yet
      again.” She became silent. We sat wondering and still. This was for a
      whole minute, she looking at the floor and her lips moving but uttering
      nothing. Then came these words, but hardly audible: “And in a thousand
      years the English power in France will not rise up from that blow.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made my flesh creep. It was uncanny. She was in a trance again—I
      could see it—just as she was that day in the pastures of Domremy
      when she prophesied about us boys in the war and afterward did not know
      that she had done it. She was not conscious now; but Catherine did not
      know that, and so she said, in a happy voice:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, I believe it, I believe it, and I am so glad! Then you will come back
      and bide with us all your life long, and we will love you so, and honor
      you!”
     </p>
    <p>
      A scarcely perceptible spasm flitted across Joan’s face, and the dreamy
      voice muttered:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Before two years are sped I shall die a cruel death!”
     </p>
    <p>
      I sprang forward with a warning hand up. That is why Catherine did not
      scream. She was going to do that—I saw it plainly. Then I whispered
      her to slip out of the place, and say nothing of what had happened. I said
      Joan was asleep—asleep and dreaming. Catherine whispered back, and
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, I am so grateful that it is only a dream! It sounded like prophecy.”
       And she was gone.
    </p>
    <p>
      Like prophecy! I knew it was prophecy; and I sat down crying, as knowing
      we should lose her. Soon she started, shivering slightly, and came to
      herself, and looked around and saw me crying there, and jumped out of her
      chair and ran to me all in a whirl of sympathy and compassion, and put her
      hand on my head, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “My poor boy! What is it? Look up and tell me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I had to tell her a lie; I grieved to do it, but there was no other way. I
      picked up an old letter from my table, written by Heaven knows who, about
      some matter Heaven knows what, and told her I had just gotten it from Pere
      Fronte, and that in it it said the children’s Fairy Tree had been chopped
      down by some miscreant or other, and— I got no further. She snatched
      the letter from my hand and searched it up and down and all over, turning
      it this way and that, and sobbing great sobs, and the tears flowing down
      her cheeks, and ejaculating all the time, “Oh, cruel, cruel! how could any
      be so heartless? Ah, poor Arbre Fee de Bourlemont gone—and we
      children loved it so! Show me the place where it says it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      And I, still lying, showed her the pretended fatal words on the pretended
      fatal page, and she gazed at them through her tears, and said she could
      see herself that they were hateful, ugly words—they “had the very
      look of it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then we heard a strong voice down the corridor announcing:
    </p>
    <p>
      “His majesty’s messenger—with despatches for her Excellency the
      Commander-in-Chief of the Armies of France!”
     </p>
    <h3>
      29 Fierce Talbot Reconsiders
    </h3>
    <p>
      I KNEW she had seen the wisdom of the Tree. But when? I could not know.
      Doubtless before she had lately told the King to use her, for that she had
      but one year left to work in. It had not occurred to me at the time, but
      the conviction came upon me now that at that time she had already seen the
      Tree. It had brought her a welcome message; that was plain, otherwise she
      could not have been so joyous and light-hearted as she had been these
      latter days. The death-warning had nothing dismal about it for her; no, it
      was remission of exile, it was leave to come home.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, she had seen the Tree. No one had taken the prophecy to heart which
      she made to the King; and for a good reason, no doubt; no one wanted to
      take it to heart; all wanted to banish it away and forget it. And all had
      succeeded, and would go on to the end placid and comfortable. All but me
      alone. I must carry my awful secret without any to help me. A heavy load,
      a bitter burden; and would cost me a daily heartbreak. She was to die; and
      so soon. I had never dreamed of that. How could I, and she so strong and
      fresh and young, and every day earning a new right to a peaceful and
      honored old age? For at that time I thought old age valuable. I do not
      know why, but I thought so. All young people think it, I believe, they
      being ignorant and full of superstitions. She had seen the Tree. All that
      miserable night those ancient verses went floating back and forth through
      my brain:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     And when, in exile wand’ring, we
     Shall fainting yearn for glimpse of thee,
     Oh, rise upon our sight!
</pre>
    <p>
      But at dawn the bugles and the drums burst through the dreamy hush of the
      morning, and it was turn out all! mount and ride. For there was red work
      to be done.
    </p>
    <p>
      We marched to Meung without halting. There we carried the bridge by
      assault, and left a force to hold it, the rest of the army marching away
      next morning toward Beaugency, where the lion Talbot, the terror of the
      French, was in command. When we arrived at that place, the English retired
      into the castle and we sat down in the abandoned town.
    </p>
    <p>
      Talbot was not at the moment present in person, for he had gone away to
      watch for and welcome Fastolfe and his reinforcement of five thousand men.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan placed her batteries and bombarded the castle till night. Then some
      news came: Richemont, Constable of France, this long time in disgrace with
      the King, largely because of the evil machinations of La Tremouille and
      his party, was approaching with a large body of men to offer his services
      to Joan—and very much she needed them, now that Fastolfe was so
      close by. Richemont had wanted to join us before, when we first marched on
      Orleans; but the foolish King, slave of those paltry advisers of his,
      warned him to keep his distance and refused all reconciliation with him.
    </p>
    <p>
      I go into these details because they are important. Important because they
      lead up to the exhibition of a new gift in Joan’s extraordinary mental
      make-up—statesmanship. It is a sufficiently strange thing to find
      that great quality in an ignorant country-girl of seventeen and a half,
      but she had it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan was for receiving Richemont cordially, and so was La Hire and the two
      young Lavals and other chiefs, but the Lieutenant-General, d’Alencon,
      strenuously and stubbornly opposed it. He said he had absolute orders from
      the King to deny and defy Richemont, and that if they were overridden he
      would leave the army. This would have been a heavy disaster, indeed. But
      Joan set herself the task of persuading him that the salvation of France
      took precedence of all minor things—even the commands of a sceptered
      ass; and she accomplished it. She persuaded him to disobey the King in the
      interest of the nation, and to be reconciled to Count Richemont and
      welcome him. That was statesmanship; and of the highest and soundest sort.
      Whatever thing men call great, look for it in Joan of Arc, and there you
      will find it.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the early morning, June 17th, the scouts reported the approach of
      Talbot and Fastolfe with Fastolfe’s succoring force. Then the drums beat
      to arms; and we set forth to meet the English, leaving Richemont and his
      troops behind to watch the castle of Beaugency and keep its garrison at
      home. By and by we came in sight of the enemy. Fastolfe had tried to
      convince Talbot that it would be wisest to retreat and not risk a battle
      with Joan at this time, but distribute the new levies among the English
      strongholds of the Loire, thus securing them against capture; then be
      patient and wait—wait for more levies from Paris; let Joan exhaust
      her army with fruitless daily skirmishing; then at the right time fall
      upon her in resistless mass and annihilate her. He was a wise old
      experienced general, was Fastolfe. But that fierce Talbot would hear of no
      delay. He was in a rage over the punishment which the Maid had inflicted
      upon him at Orleans and since, and he swore by God and Saint George that
      he would have it out with her if he had to fight her all alone. So
      Fastolfe yielded, though he said they were now risking the loss of
      everything which the English had gained by so many years’ work and so many
      hard knocks.
    </p>
    <p>
      The enemy had taken up a strong position, and were waiting, in order of
      battle, with their archers to the front and a stockade before them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Night was coming on. A messenger came from the English with a rude
      defiance and an offer of battle. But Joan’s dignity was not ruffled, her
      bearing was not discomposed. She said to the herald:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Go back and say it is too late to meet to-night; but to-morrow, please
      God and our Lady, we will come to close quarters.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The night fell dark and rainy. It was that sort of light steady rain which
      falls so softly and brings to one’s spirit such serenity and peace. About
      ten o’clock D’Alencon, the Bastard of Orleans, La Hire, Pothon of
      Saintrailles, and two or three other generals came to our headquarters
      tent, and sat down to discuss matters with Joan. Some thought it was a
      pity that Joan had declined battle, some thought not. Then Pothon asked
      her why she had declined it. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There was more than one reason. These English are ours—they cannot
      get away from us. Wherefore there is no need to take risks, as at other
      times. The day was far spent. It is good to have much time and the fair
      light of day when one’s force is in a weakened state—nine hundred of
      us yonder keeping the bridge of Meung under the Marshal de Rais, fifteen
      hundred with the Constable of France keeping the bridge and watching the
      castle of Beaugency.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Dunois said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I grieve for this decision, Excellency, but it cannot be helped. And the
      case will be the same the morrow, as to that.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan was walking up and down just then. She laughed her affectionate,
      comrady laugh, and stopping before that old war-tiger she put her small
      hand above his head and touched one of his plumes, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now tell me, wise man, which feather is it that I touch?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “In sooth, Excellency, that I cannot.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Name of God, Bastard, Bastard! you cannot tell me this small thing, yet
      are bold to name a large one—telling us what is in the stomach of
      the unborn morrow: that we shall not have those men. Now it is my thought
      that they will be with us.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That made a stir. All wanted to know why she thought that. But La Hire
      took the word and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Let be. If she thinks it, that is enough. It will happen.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then Pothon of Santrailles said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There were other reasons for declining battle, according to the saying of
      your Excellency?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. One was that we being weak and the day far gone, the battle might
      not be decisive. When it is fought it must be decisive. And it shall be.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “God grant it, and amen. There were still other reasons?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “One other—yes.” She hesitated a moment, then said: “This was not
      the day. To-morrow is the day. It is so written.”
     </p>
    <p>
      They were going to assail her with eager questionings, but she put up her
      hand and prevented them. Then she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It will be the most noble and beneficent victory that God has vouchsafed
      for France at any time. I pray you question me not as to whence or how I
      know this thing, but be content that it is so.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was pleasure in every face, and conviction and high confidence. A
      murmur of conversation broke out, but that was interrupted by a messenger
      from the outposts who brought news—namely, that for an hour there
      had been stir and movement in the English camp of a sort unusual at such a
      time and with a resting army, he said. Spies had been sent under cover of
      the rain and darkness to inquire into it. They had just come back and
      reported that large bodies of men had been dimly made out who were
      slipping stealthily away in the direction of Meung.
    </p>
    <p>
      The generals were very much surprised, as any might tell from their faces.
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is a retreat,” said Joan.
    </p>
    <p>
      “It has that look,” said D’Alencon.
    </p>
    <p>
      “It certainly has,” observed the Bastard and La Hire.
    </p>
    <p>
      “It was not to be expected,” said Louis de Bourbon, “but one can divine
      the purpose of it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes,” responded Joan. “Talbot has reflected. His rash brain has cooled.
      He thinks to take the bridge of Meung and escape to the other side of the
      river. He knows that this leaves his garrison of Beaugency at the mercy of
      fortune, to escape our hands if it can; but there is no other course if he
      would avoid this battle, and that he also knows. But he shall not get the
      bridge. We will see to that.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes,” said D’Alencon, “we must follow him, and take care of that matter.
      What of Beaugency?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Leave Beaugency to me, gentle duke; I will have it in two hours, and at
      no cost of blood.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is true, Excellency. You will but need to deliver this news there and
      receive the surrender.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. And I will be with you at Meung with the dawn, fetching the
      Constable and his fifteen hundred; and when Talbot knows that Beaugency
      has fallen it will have an effect upon him.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “By the mass, yes!” cried La Hire. “He will join his Meung garrison to his
      army and break for Paris. Then we shall have our bridge force with us
      again, along with our Beaugency watchers, and be stronger for our great
      day’s work by four-and-twenty hundred able soldiers, as was here promised
      within the hour. Verily this Englishman is doing our errands for us and
      saving us much blood and trouble. Orders, Excellency—give us
      orders!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “They are simple. Let the men rest three hours longer. At one o’clock the
      advance-guard will march, under our command, with Pothon of Saintrailles
      as second; the second division will follow at two under the
      Lieutenant-General. Keep well in the rear of the enemy, and see to it that
      you avoid an engagement. I will ride under guard to Beaugency and make so
      quick work there that I and the Constable of France will join you before
      dawn with his men.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She kept her word. Her guard mounted and we rode off through the puttering
      rain, taking with us a captured English officer to confirm Joan’s news. We
      soon covered the journey and summoned the castle. Richard Guetin, Talbot’s
      lieutenant, being convinced that he and his five hundred men were left
      helpless, conceded that it would be useless to try to hold out. He could
      not expect easy terms, yet Joan granted them nevertheless. His garrison
      could keep their horses and arms, and carry away property to the value of
      a silver mark per man. They could go whither they pleased, but must not
      take arms against France again under ten days.
    </p>
    <p>
      Before dawn we were with our army again, and with us the Constable and
      nearly all his men, for we left only a small garrison in Beaugency castle.
      We heard the dull booming of cannon to the front, and knew that Talbot was
      beginning his attack on the bridge. But some time before it was yet light
      the sound ceased and we heard it no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      Guetin had sent a messenger through our lines under a safe-conduct given
      by Joan, to tell Talbot of the surrender. Of course this poursuivant had
      arrived ahead of us. Talbot had held it wisdom to turn now and retreat
      upon Paris. When daylight came he had disappeared; and with him Lord
      Scales and the garrison of Meung.
    </p>
    <p>
      What a harvest of English strongholds we had reaped in those three days!—strongholds
      which had defied France with quite cool confidence and plenty of it until
      we came.
    </p>
    <h3>
      30 The Red Field of Patay
    </h3>

    <p>
      WHEN THE morning broke at last on that forever memorable 18th of June,
      there was no enemy discoverable anywhere, as I have said. But that did not
      trouble me. I knew we should find him, and that we should strike him;
      strike him the promised blow—the one from which the English power in
      France would not rise up in a thousand years, as Joan had said in her
      trance.
    </p>
    <p>
      The enemy had plunged into the wide plains of La Beauce—a roadless
      waste covered with bushes, with here and there bodies of forest trees—a
      region where an army would be hidden from view in a very little while. We
      found the trail in the soft wet earth and followed it. It indicated an
      orderly march; no confusion, no panic.
    </p>
    <p>
      But we had to be cautious. In such a piece of country we could walk into
      an ambush without any trouble. Therefore Joan sent bodies of cavalry ahead
      under La Hire, Pothon, and other captains, to feel the way. Some of the
      other officers began to show uneasiness; this sort of hide-and-go-seek
      business troubled them and made their confidence a little shaky. Joan
      divined their state of mind and cried out impetuously:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Name of God, what would you? We must smite these English, and we will.
      They shall not escape us. Though they were hung to the clouds we would get
      them!”
     </p>
    <p>
      By and by we were nearing Patay; it was about a league away. Now at this
      time our reconnaissance, feeling its way in the bush, frightened a deer,
      and it went bounding away and was out of sight in a moment. Then hardly a
      minute later a dull great shout went up in the distance toward Patay. It
      was the English soldiery. They had been shut up in a garrison so long on
      moldy food that they could not keep their delight to themselves when this
      fine fresh meat came springing into their midst. Poor creature, it had
      wrought damage to a nation which loved it well. For the French knew where
      the English were now, whereas the English had no suspicion of where the
      French were.
    </p>
    <p>
      La Hire halted where he was, and sent back the tidings. Joan was radiant
      with joy. The Duke d’Alencon said to her:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Very well, we have found them; shall we fight them?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Have you good spurs, prince?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why? Will they make us run away?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Nenni, en nom de Dieu! These English are ours—they are lost. They
      will fly. Who overtakes them will need good spurs. Forward—close
      up!”
     </p>
    <p>
      By the time we had come up with La Hire the English had discovered our
      presence. Talbot’s force was marching in three bodies. First his
      advance-guard; then his artillery; then his battle-corps a good way in the
      rear. He was now out of the bush and in a fair open country. He at once
      posted his artillery, his advance-guard, and five hundred picked archers
      along some hedges where the French would be obliged to pass, and hoped to
      hold this position till his battle-corps could come up. Sir John Fastolfe
      urged the battle-corps into a gallop. Joan saw her opportunity and ordered
      La Hire to advance—which La Hire promptly did, launching his wild
      riders like a storm-wind, his customary fashion.
    </p>
    <p>
      The duke and the Bastard wanted to follow, but Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Not yet—wait.”
     </p>
    <p>
      So they waited—impatiently, and fidgeting in their saddles. But she
      was ready—gazing straight before her, measuring, weighing,
      calculating—by shades, minutes, fractions of minutes, seconds—with
      all her great soul present, in eye, and set of head, and noble pose of
      body—but patient, steady, master of herself—master of herself
      and of the situation.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yonder, receding, receding, plumes lifting and falling, lifting and
      falling, streamed the thundering charge of La Hire’s godless crew, La
      Hire’s great figure dominating it and his sword stretched aloft like a
      flagstaff.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, Satan and his Hellions, see them go!” Somebody muttered it in deep
      admiration.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now he was closing up—closing up on Fastolfe’s rushing corps.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now he struck it—struck it hard, and broke its order. It lifted
      the duke and the Bastard in their saddles to see it; and they turned,
      trembling with excitement, to Joan, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now!”
     </p>
    <p>
      But she put up her hand, still gazing, weighing, calculating, and said
      again:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Wait—not yet.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Fastolfe’s hard-driven battle-corps raged on like an avalanche toward the
      waiting advance-guard. Suddenly these conceived the idea that it was
      flying in panic before Joan; and so in that instant it broke and swarmed
      away in a mad panic itself, with Talbot storming and cursing after it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now was the golden time. Joan drove her spurs home and waved the advance
      with her sword. “Follow me!” she cried, and bent her head to her horse’s
      neck and sped away like the wind!
    </p>
    <p>
      We went down into the confusion of that flying rout, and for three long
      hours we cut and hacked and stabbed. At last the bugles sang “Halt!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Battle of Patay was won.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan of Arc dismounted, and stood surveying that awful field, lost in
      thought. Presently she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The praise is to God. He has smitten with a heavy hand this day.” After a
      little she lifted her face, and looking afar off, said, with the manner of
      one who is thinking aloud, “In a thousand years—a thousand years—the
      English power in France will not rise up from this blow.” She stood again
      a time thinking, then she turned toward her grouped generals, and there
      was a glory in her face and a noble light in her eye; and she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, friends, friends, do you know?—do you comprehend? France is on
      the way to be free!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And had never been, but for Joan of Arc!” said La Hire, passing before
      her and bowing low, the other following and doing likewise; he muttering
      as he went, “I will say it though I be damned for it.” Then battalion
      after battalion of our victorious army swung by, wildly cheering. And they
      shouted, “Live forever, Maid of Orleans, live forever!” while Joan,
      smiling, stood at the salute with her sword.
    </p>
    <p>
      This was not the last time I saw the Maid of Orleans on the red field of
      Patay. Toward the end of the day I came upon her where the dead and dying
      lay stretched all about in heaps and winrows; our men had mortally wounded
      an English prisoner who was too poor to pay a ransom, and from a distance
      she had seen that cruel thing done; and had galloped to the place and sent
      for a priest, and now she was holding the head of her dying enemy in her
      lap, and easing him to his death with comforting soft words, just as his
      sister might have done; and the womanly tears running down her face all
      the time. (1)
    </p>
    <p>
      (1) Lord Ronald Gower (Joan of Arc, p. 82) says: “Michelet discovered this
      story in the deposition of Joan of Arc’s page, Louis de Conte, who was
      probably an eye-witness of the scene.” This is true. It was a part of the
      testimony of the author of these “Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc,”
       given by him in the Rehabilitation proceedings of 1456. —TRANSLATOR.
    </p>
    <h3>
      31 France Begins to Live Again
    </h3>
    <h3>
      JOAN HAD said true: France was on the way to be free.
    </h3>
    <p>
      The war called the Hundred Years’ War was very sick to-day. Sick on its
      English side—for the very first time since its birth, ninety-one
      years gone by.
    </p>
    <p>
      Shall we judge battles by the numbers killed and the ruin wrought? Or
      shall we not rather judge them by the results which flowed from them? Any
      one will say that a battle is only truly great or small according to its
      results. Yes, any one will grant that, for it is the truth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Judged by results, Patay’s place is with the few supremely great and
      imposing battles that have been fought since the peoples of the world
      first resorted to arms for the settlement of their quarrels. So judged, it
      is even possible that Patay has no peer among that few just mentioned, but
      stand alone, as the supremest of historic conflicts. For when it began
      France lay gasping out the remnant of an exhausted life, her case wholly
      hopeless in the view of all political physicians; when it ended, three
      hours later, she was convalescent. Convalescent, and nothing requisite but
      time and ordinary nursing to bring her back to perfect health. The dullest
      physician of them all could see this, and there was none to deny it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Many death-sick nations have reached convalescence through a series of
      battles, a procession of battles, a weary tale of wasting conflicts
      stretching over years, but only one has reached it in a single day and by
      a single battle. That nation is France, and that battle Patay.
    </p>
    <p>
      Remember it and be proud of it; for you are French, and it is the
      stateliest fact in the long annals of your country. There it stands, with
      its head in the clouds! And when you grow up you will go on pilgrimage to
      the field of Patay, and stand uncovered in the presence of—what? A
      monument with its head in the clouds? Yes. For all nations in all times
      have built monuments on their battle-fields to keep green the memory of
      the perishable deed that was wrought there and of the perishable name of
      him who wrought it; and will France neglect Patay and Joan of Arc? Not for
      long. And will she build a monument scaled to their rank as compared with
      the world’s other fields and heroes? Perhaps—if there be room for it
      under the arch of the sky.
    </p>
    <p>
      But let us look back a little, and consider certain strange and impressive
      facts. The Hundred Years’ War began in 1337. It raged on and on, year
      after year and year after year; and at last England stretched France prone
      with that fearful blow at Crecy. But she rose and struggled on, year after
      year, and at last again she went down under another devastating blow—Poitiers.
      She gathered her crippled strength once more, and the war raged on, and
      on, and still on, year after year, decade after decade. Children were
      born, grew up, married, died—the war raged on; their children in
      turn grew up, married, died—the war raged on; their children,
      growing, saw France struck down again; this time under the incredible
      disaster of Agincourt—and still the war raged on, year after year,
      and in time these children married in their turn.
    </p>
    <p>
      France was a wreck, a ruin, a desolation. The half of it belonged to
      England, with none to dispute or deny the truth; the other half belonged
      to nobody—in three months would be flying the English flag; the
      French King was making ready to throw away his crown and flee beyond the
      seas.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now came the ignorant country-maid out of her remote village and
      confronted this hoary war, this all-consuming conflagration that had swept
      the land for three generations. Then began the briefest and most amazing
      campaign that is recorded in history. In seven weeks it was finished. In
      seven weeks she hopelessly crippled that gigantic war that was ninety-one
      years old. At Orleans she struck it a staggering blow; on the field of
      Patay she broke its back.
    </p>
    <p>
      Think of it. Yes, one can do that; but understand it? Ah, that is another
      matter; none will ever be able to comprehend that stupefying marvel.
    </p>
    <p>
      Seven weeks—with her and there a little bloodshed. Perhaps the most
      of it, in any single fight, at Patay, where the English began six thousand
      strong and left two thousand dead upon the field. It is said and believed
      that in three battles alone—Crecy, Poitiers, and Agincourt—near
      a hundred thousand Frenchmen fell, without counting the thousand other
      fights of that long war. The dead of that war make a mournful long list—an
      interminable list. Of men slain in the field the count goes by tens of
      thousands; of innocent women and children slain by bitter hardship and
      hunger it goes by that appalling term, millions.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was an ogre, that war; an ogre that went about for near a hundred
      years, crunching men and dripping blood from its jaws. And with her little
      hand that child of seventeen struck him down; and yonder he lies stretched
      on the field of Patay, and will not get up any more while this old world
      lasts.
    </p>
    <h3>
      32 The Joyous News Flies Fast
    </h3>
    <p>
      THE GREAT news of Patay was carried over the whole of France in twenty
      hours, people said. I do not know as to that; but one thing is sure,
      anyway: the moment a man got it he flew shouting and glorifying God and
      told his neighbor; and that neighbor flew with it to the next homestead;
      and so on and so on without resting the word traveled; and when a man got
      it in the night, at what hour soever, he jumped out of his bed and bore
      the blessed message along. And the joy that went with it was like the
      light that flows across the land when an eclipse is receding from the face
      of the sun; and, indeed, you may say that France had lain in an eclipse
      this long time; yes, buried in a black gloom which these beneficent
      tidings were sweeping away now before the onrush of their white splendor.
    </p>
    <p>
      The news beat the flying enemy to Yeuville, and the town rose against its
      English masters and shut the gates against their brethren. It flew to Mont
      Pipeau, to Saint Simon, and to this, that, and the other English fortress;
      and straightway the garrison applied the torch and took to the fields and
      the woods. A detachment of our army occupied Meung and pillaged it.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we reached Orleans that tow was as much as fifty times insaner with
      joy than we had ever seen it before—which is saying much. Night had
      just fallen, and the illuminations were on so wonderful a scale that we
      seemed to plow through seas of fire; and as to the noise—the hoarse
      cheering of the multitude, the thundering of cannon, the clash of bells—indeed,
      there was never anything like it. And everywhere rose a new cry that burst
      upon us like a storm when the column entered the gates, and nevermore
      ceased: “Welcome to Joan of Arc—way for the SAVIOR OF FRANCE!” And
      there was another cry: “Crecy is avenged! Poitiers is avenged! Agincourt
      is avenged!—Patay shall live forever!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Mad? Why, you never could imagine it in the world. The prisoners were in
      the center of the column. When that came along and the people caught sight
      of their masterful old enemy Talbot, that had made them dance so long to
      his grim war-music, you may imagine what the uproar was like if you can,
      for I can not describe it. They were so glad to see him that presently
      they wanted to have him out and hang him; so Joan had him brought up to
      the front to ride in her protection. They made a striking pair.
    </p>
    <h3>
      33 Joan’s Five Great Deeds
    </h3>

    <p>
      YES, ORLEANS was in a delirium of felicity. She invited the King, and made
      sumptuous preparations to receive him, but—he didn’t come. He was
      simply a serf at that time, and La Tremouille was his master. Master and
      serf were visiting together at the master’s castle of Sully-sur-Loire.
    </p>
    <p>
      At Beaugency Joan had engaged to bring about a reconciliation between the
      Constable Richemont and the King. She took Richemont to Sully-sur-Loire
      and made her promise good.
    </p>
    <p>
      The great deeds of Joan of Arc are five:
    </p>
    <p>
      1. The Raising of the Siege.
    </p>
    <p>
      2. The Victory of Patay.
    </p>
    <p>
      3. The Reconciliation at Sully-sur-Loire.
    </p>
    <p>
      4. The Coronation of the King.
    </p>
    <p>
      5. The Bloodless March.
    </p>
    <p>
      We shall come to the Bloodless March presently (and the Coronation). It
      was the victorious long march which Joan made through the enemy’s country
      from Gien to Rheims, and thence to the gates of Paris, capturing every
      English town and fortress that barred the road, from the beginning of the
      journey to the end of it; and this by the mere force of her name, and
      without shedding a drop of blood—perhaps the most extraordinary
      campaign in this regard in history—this is the most glorious of her
      military exploits.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Reconciliation was one of Joan’s most important achievements. No one
      else could have accomplished it; and, in fact, no one else of high
      consequence had any disposition to try. In brains, in scientific warfare,
      and in statesmanship the Constable Richemont was the ablest man in France.
      His loyalty was sincere; his probity was above suspicion—(and it
      made him sufficiently conspicuous in that trivial and conscienceless
      Court).
    </p>
    <p>
      In restoring Richemont to France, Joan made thoroughly secure the
      successful completion of the great work which she had begun. She had never
      seen Richemont until he came to her with his little army. Was it not
      wonderful that at a glance she should know him for the one man who could
      finish and perfect her work and establish it in perpetuity? How was it
      that that child was able to do this? It was because she had the “seeing
      eye,” as one of our knights had once said. Yes, she had that great gift—almost
      the highest and rarest that has been granted to man. Nothing of an
      extraordinary sort was still to be done, yet the remaining work could not
      safely be left to the King’s idiots; for it would require wise
      statesmanship and long and patient though desultory hammering of the
      enemy. Now and then, for a quarter of a century yet, there would be a
      little fighting to do, and a handy man could carry that on with small
      disturbance to the rest of the country; and little by little, and with
      progressive certainty, the English would disappear from France.
    </p>
    <p>
      And that happened. Under the influence of Richemont the King became at a
      later time a man—a man, a king, a brave and capable and determined
      soldier. Within six years after Patay he was leading storming parties
      himself; fighting in fortress ditches up to his waist in water, and
      climbing scaling-ladders under a furious fire with a pluck that would have
      satisfied even Joan of Arc. In time he and Richemont cleared away all the
      English; even from regions where the people had been under their
      mastership for three hundred years. In such regions wise and careful work
      was necessary, for the English rule had been fair and kindly; and men who
      have been ruled in that way are not always anxious for a change.
    </p>
    <p>
      Which of Joan’s five chief deeds shall we call the chiefest? It is my
      thought that each in its turn was that. This is saying that, taken as a
      whole, they equalized each other, and neither was then greater than its
      mate.
    </p>
    <p>
      Do you perceive? Each was a stage in an ascent. To leave out one of them
      would defeat the journey; to achieve one of them at the wrong time and in
      the wrong place would have the same effect.
    </p>
    <p>
      Consider the Coronation. As a masterpiece of diplomacy, where can you find
      its superior in our history? Did the King suspect its vast importance? No.
      Did his ministers? No. Did the astute Bedford, representative of the
      English crown? No. An advantage of incalculable importance was here under
      the eyes of the King and of Bedford; the King could get it by a bold
      stroke, Bedford could get it without an effort; but, being ignorant of its
      value, neither of them put forth his hand. Of all the wise people in high
      office in France, only one knew the priceless worth of this neglected
      prize—the untaught child of seventeen, Joan of Arc—and she had
      known it from the beginning as an essential detail of her mission.
    </p>
    <p>
      How did she know it? It was simple: she was a peasant. That tells the
      whole story. She was of the people and knew the people; those others moved
      in a loftier sphere and knew nothing much about them. We make little
      account of that vague, formless, inert mass, that mighty underlying force
      which we call “the people”—an epithet which carries contempt with
      it. It is a strange attitude; for at bottom we know that the throne which
      the people support stands, and that when that support is removed nothing
      in this world can save it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now, then, consider this fact, and observe its importance. Whatever the
      parish priest believes his flock believes; they love him, they revere him;
      he is their unfailing friend, their dauntless protector, their comforter
      in sorrow, their helper in their day of need; he has their whole
      confidence; what he tells them to do, that they will do, with a blind and
      affectionate obedience, let it cost what it may. Add these facts
      thoughtfully together, and what is the sum? This: The parish priest
      governs the nation. What is the King, then, if the parish priest withdraws
      his support and deny his authority? Merely a shadow and no King; let him
      resign.
    </p>
    <p>
      Do you get that idea? Then let us proceed. A priest is consecrated to his
      office by the awful hand of God, laid upon him by his appointed
      representative on earth. That consecration is final; nothing can undo it,
      nothing can remove it. Neither the Pope nor any other power can strip the
      priest of his office; God gave it, and it is forever sacred and secure.
      The dull parish knows all this. To priest and parish, whatsoever is
      anointed of God bears an office whose authority can no longer be disputed
      or assailed. To the parish priest, and to his subjects the nation, an
      uncrowned king is a similitude of a person who has been named for holy
      orders but has not been consecrated; he has no office, he has not been
      ordained, another may be appointed to his place. In a word, an uncrowned
      king is a doubtful king; but if God appoint him and His servant the Bishop
      anoint him, the doubt is annihilated; the priest and the parish are his
      loyal subjects straightway, and while he lives they will recognize no king
      but him.
    </p>
    <p>
      To Joan of Arc, the peasant-girl, Charles VII. was no King until he was
      crowned; to her he was only the Dauphin; that is to say, the heir. If I
      have ever made her call him King, it was a mistake; she called him the
      Dauphin, and nothing else until after the Coronation. It shows you as in a
      mirror—for Joan was a mirror in which the lowly hosts of France were
      clearly reflected—that to all that vast underlying force called “the
      people,” he was no King but only Dauphin before his crowning, and was
      indisputably and irrevocably King after it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now you understand what a colossal move on the political chess-board the
      Coronation was. Bedford realized this by and by, and tried to patch up his
      mistake by crowning his King; but what good could that do? None in the
      world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Speaking of chess, Joan’s great acts may be likened to that game. Each
      move was made in its proper order, and it as great and effective because
      it was made in its proper order and not out of it. Each, at the time made,
      seemed the greatest move; but the final result made them all recognizable
      as equally essential and equally important. This is the game, as played:
    </p>
    <p>
      1. Joan moves to Orleans and Patay—check.
    </p>
    <p>
      2. Then moves the Reconciliation—but does not proclaim check, it
      being a move for position, and to take effect later.
    </p>
    <p>
      3. Next she moves the Coronation—check.
    </p>
    <p>
      4. Next, the Bloodless March—check.
    </p>
    <p>
      5. Final move (after her death), the reconciled Constable Richemont to the
      French King’s elbow—checkmate.
    </p>
    <h3>
      34 The Jests of the Burgundians
    </h3>
    <p>
      THE CAMPAIGN of the Loire had as good as opened the road to Rheims. There
      was no sufficient reason now why the Coronation should not take place. The
      Coronation would complete the mission which Joan had received from heaven,
      and then she would be forever done with war, and would fly home to her
      mother and her sheep, and never stir from the hearthstone and happiness
      any more. That was her dream; and she could not rest, she was so impatient
      to see it fulfilled. She became so possessed with this matter that I began
      to lose faith in her two prophecies of her early death—and, of
      course, when I found that faith wavering I encouraged it to waver all the
      more.
    </p>
    <p>
      The King was afraid to start to Rheims, because the road was mile-posted
      with English fortresses, so to speak. Joan held them in light esteem and
      not things to be afraid of in the existing modified condition of English
      confidence.
    </p>
    <p>
      And she was right. As it turned out, the march to Rheims was nothing but a
      holiday excursion: Joan did not even take any artillery along, she was so
      sure it would not be necessary. We marched from Gien twelve thousand
      strong. This was the 29th of June. The Maid rode by the side of the King;
      on his other side was the Duke d’Alencon. After the duke followed three
      other princes of the blood. After these followed the Bastard of Orleans,
      the Marshal de Boussac, and the Admiral of France. After these came La
      Hire, Saintrailles, Tremouille, and a long procession of knights and
      nobles.
    </p>
    <p>
      We rested three days before Auxerre. The city provisioned the army, and a
      deputation waited upon the King, but we did not enter the place.
    </p>
    <p>
      Saint-Florentin opened its gates to the King.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the 4th of July we reached Saint-Fal, and yonder lay Troyes before us—a
      town which had a burning interest for us boys; for we remembered how seven
      years before, in the pastures of Domremy, the Sunflower came with his
      black flag and brought us the shameful news of the Treaty of Troyes—that
      treaty which gave France to England, and a daughter of our royal line in
      marriage to the Butcher of Agincourt. That poor town was not to blame, of
      course; yet we flushed hot with that old memory, and hoped there would be
      a misunderstanding here, for we dearly wanted to storm the place and burn
      it. It was powerfully garrisoned by English and Burgundian soldiery, and
      was expecting reinforcements from Paris. Before night we camped before its
      gates and made rough work with a sortie which marched out against us.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan summoned Troyes to surrender. Its commandant, seeing that she had no
      artillery, scoffed at the idea, and sent her a grossly insulting reply.
      Five days we consulted and negotiated. No result. The King was about to
      turn back now and give up. He was afraid to go on, leaving this strong
      place in his rear. Then La Hire put in a word, with a slap in it for some
      of his Majesty’s advisers:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The Maid of Orleans undertook this expedition of her own motion; and it
      is my mind that it is her judgment that should be followed here, and not
      that of any other, let him be of whatsoever breed and standing he may.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was wisdom and righteousness in that. So the King sent for the Maid,
      and asked her how she thought the prospect looked. She said, without any
      tone of doubt or question in her voice:
    </p>
    <p>
      “In three days’ time the place is ours.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The smug Chancellor put in a word now:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If we were sure of it we would wait her six days.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Six days, forsooth! Name of God, man, we will enter the gates to-morrow!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she mounted, and rode her lines, crying out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Make preparation—to your work, friends, to your work! We assault at
      dawn!”
     </p>
    <p>
      She worked hard that night, slaving away with her own hands like a common
      soldier. She ordered fascines and fagots to be prepared and thrown into
      the fosse, thereby to bridge it; and in this rough labor she took a man’s
      share.
    </p>
    <p>
      At dawn she took her place at the head of the storming force and the
      bugles blew the assault. At that moment a flag of truce was flung to the
      breeze from the walls, and Troyes surrendered without firing a shot.
    </p>
    <p>
      The next day the King with Joan at his side and the Paladin bearing her
      banner entered the town in state at the head of the army. And a goodly
      army it was now, for it had been growing ever bigger and bigger from the
      first.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now a curious thing happened. By the terms of the treaty made with the
      town the garrison of English and Burgundian soldiery were to be allowed to
      carry away their “goods” with them. This was well, for otherwise how would
      they buy the wherewithal to live? Very well; these people were all to go
      out by the one gate, and at the time set for them to depart we young
      fellows went to that gate, along with the Dwarf, to see the march-out.
      Presently here they came in an interminable file, the foot-soldiers in the
      lead. As they approached one could see that each bore a burden of a bulk
      and weight to sorely tax his strength; and we said among ourselves, truly
      these folk are well off for poor common soldiers. When they were come
      nearer, what do you think? Every rascal of them had a French prisoner on
      his back! They were carrying away their “goods,” you see—their
      property—strictly according to the permission granted by the treaty.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now think how clever that was, how ingenious. What could a body say? what
      could a body do? For certainly these people were within their right. These
      prisoners were property; nobody could deny that. My dears, if those had
      been English captives, conceive of the richness of that booty! For English
      prisoners had been scarce and precious for a hundred years; whereas it was
      a different matter with French prisoners. They had been over-abundant for
      a century. The possessor of a French prisoner did not hold him long for
      ransom, as a rule, but presently killed him to save the cost of his keep.
      This shows you how small was the value of such a possession in those
      times. When we took Troyes a calf was worth thirty francs, a sheep
      sixteen, a French prisoner eight. It was an enormous price for those other
      animals—a price which naturally seems incredible to you. It was the
      war, you see. It worked two ways: it made meat dear and prisoners cheap.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, here were these poor Frenchmen being carried off. What could we do?
      Very little of a permanent sort, but we did what we could. We sent a
      messenger flying to Joan, and we and the French guards halted the
      procession for a parley—to gain time, you see. A big Burgundian lost
      his temper and swore a great oath that none should stop him; he would go,
      and would take his prisoner with him. But we blocked him off, and he saw
      that he was mistaken about going—he couldn’t do it. He exploded into
      the maddest cursings and revilings, then, and, unlashing his prisoner from
      his back, stood him up, all bound and helpless; then drew his knife, and
      said to us with a light of sarcasting triumph in his eye:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I may not carry him away, you say—yet he is mine, none will dispute
      it. Since I may not convey him hence, this property of mine, there is
      another way. Yes, I can kill him; not even the dullest among you will
      question that right. Ah, you had not thought of that—vermin!”
     </p>
    <p>
      That poor starved fellow begged us with his piteous eyes to save him; then
      spoke, and said he had a wife and little children at home. Think how it
      wrung our heartstrings. But what could we do? The Burgundian was within
      his right. We could only beg and plead for the prisoner. Which we did. And
      the Burgundian enjoyed it. He stayed his hand to hear more of it, and
      laugh at it. That stung. Then the Dwarf said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Prithee, young sirs, let me beguile him; for when a matter requiring
      permission is to the fore, I have indeed a gift in that sort, as any will
      tell you that know me well. You smile; and that is punishment for my
      vanity; and fairly earned, I grant you. Still, if I may toy a little, just
      a little—” saying which he stepped to the Burgundian and began a
      fair soft speech, all of goodly and gentle tenor; and in the midst he
      mentioned the Maid; and was going on to say how she out of her good heart
      would prize and praise this compassionate deed which he was about to—
      It was as far as he got. The Burgundian burst into his smooth oration with
      an insult leveled at Joan of Arc. We sprang forward, but the Dwarf, his
      face all livid, brushed us aside and said, in a most grave and earnest
      way:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I crave your patience. Am not I her guard of honor? This is my affair.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And saying this he suddenly shot his right hand out and gripped the great
      Burgundian by the throat, and so held him upright on his feet. “You have
      insulted the Maid,” he said; “and the Maid is France. The tongue that does
      that earns a long furlough.”
     </p>
    <p>
      One heard the muffled cracking of bones. The Burgundian’s eyes began to
      protrude from their sockets and stare with a leaden dullness at vacancy.
      The color deepened in his face and became an opaque purple. His hands hung
      down limp, his body collapsed with a shiver, every muscle relaxed its
      tension and ceased from its function. The Dwarf took away his hand and the
      column of inert mortality sank mushily to the ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      We struck the bonds from the prisoner and told him he was free. His
      crawling humbleness changed to frantic joy in a moment, and his ghastly
      fear to a childish rage. He flew at that dead corpse and kicked it, spat
      in its face, danced upon it, crammed mud into its mouth, laughing,
      jeering, cursing, and volleying forth indecencies and bestialities like a
      drunken fiend. It was a thing to be expected; soldiering makes few saints.
      Many of the onlookers laughed, others were indifferent, none was
      surprised. But presently in his mad caperings the freed man capered within
      reach of the waiting file, and another Burgundian promptly slipped a knife
      through his neck, and down he went with a death-shriek, his brilliant
      artery blood spurting ten feet as straight and bright as a ray of light.
      There was a great burst of jolly laughter all around from friend and foe
      alike; and thus closed one of the pleasantest incidents of my checkered
      military life.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now came Joan hurrying, and deeply troubled. She considered the claim
      of the garrison, then said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You have right upon your side. It is plain. It was a careless word to put
      in the treaty, and covers too much. But ye may not take these poor men
      away. They are French, and I will not have it. The King shall ransom them,
      every one. Wait till I send you word from him; and hurt no hair of their
      heads; for I tell you, I who speak, that that would cost you very dear.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That settled it. The prisoners were safe for one while, anyway. Then she
      rode back eagerly and required that thing of the King, and would listen to
      no paltering and no excuses. So the King told her to have her way, and she
      rode straight back and bought the captives free in his name and let them
      go.
    </p>
    <h3>
      35 The Heir of France is Crowned
    </h3>
    <p>
      IT WAS here hat we saw again the Grand Master of the King’s Household, in
      whose castle Joan was guest when she tarried at Chinon in those first days
      of her coming out of her own country. She made him Bailiff of Troyes now
      by the King’s permission.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now we marched again; Chalons surrendered to us; and there by Chalons
      in a talk, Joan, being asked if she had no fears for the future, said yes,
      one—treachery. Who would believe it? who could dream it? And yet in
      a sense it was prophecy. Truly, man is a pitiful animal.
    </p>
    <p>
      We marched, marched, kept on marching; and at last, on the 16th of July,
      we came in sight of our goal, and saw the great cathedraled towers of
      Rheims rise out of the distance! Huzza after huzza swept the army from van
      to rear; and as for Joan of Arc, there where she sat her horse gazing,
      clothed all in white armor, dreamy, beautiful, and in her face a deep,
      deep joy, a joy not of earth, oh, she was not flesh, she was a spirit! Her
      sublime mission was closing—closing in flawless triumph. To-morrow
      she could say, “It is finished—let me go free.”
     </p>
    <p>
      We camped, and the hurry and rush and turmoil of the grand preparations
      began. The Archbishop and a great deputation arrived; and after these came
      flock after flock, crowd after crowd, of citizens and country-folk,
      hurrahing, in, with banners and music, and flowed over the camp, one
      rejoicing inundation after another, everybody drunk with happiness. And
      all night long Rheims was hard at work, hammering away, decorating the
      town, building triumphal arches and clothing the ancient cathedral within
      and without in a glory of opulent splendors.
    </p>
    <p>
      We moved betimes in the morning; the coronation ceremonies would begin at
      nine and last five hours. We were aware that the garrison of English and
      Burgundian soldiers had given up all thought of resisting the Maid, and
      that we should find the gates standing hospitably open and the whole city
      ready to welcome us with enthusiasm.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a delicious morning, brilliant with sunshine, but cool and fresh
      and inspiring. The army was in great form, and fine to see, as it uncoiled
      from its lair fold by fold, and stretched away on the final march of the
      peaceful Coronation Campaign.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan, on her black horse, with the Lieutenant-General and the personal
      staff grouped about her, took post for a final review and a good-by; for
      she was not expecting to ever be a soldier again, or ever serve with these
      or any other soldiers any more after this day. The army knew this, and
      believed it was looking for the last time upon the girlish face of its
      invincible little Chief, its pet, its pride, its darling, whom it had
      ennobled in its private heart with nobilities of its own creation, call
      her “Daughter of God,” “Savior of France,” “Victory’s Sweetheart,” “The
      Page of Christ,” together with still softer titles which were simply naive
      and frank endearments such as men are used to confer upon children whom
      they love. And so one saw a new thing now; a thing bred of the emotion
      that was present there on both sides. Always before, in the march-past,
      the battalions had gone swinging by in a storm of cheers, heads up and
      eyes flashing, the drums rolling, the bands braying paens of victory; but
      now there was nothing of that. But for one impressive sound, one could
      have closed his eyes and imagined himself in a world of the dead. That one
      sound was all that visited the ear in the summer stillness—just that
      one sound—the muffled tread of the marching host. As the serried
      masses drifted by, the men put their right hands up to their temples,
      palms to the front, in military salute, turning their eyes upon Joan’s
      face in mute God-bless-you and farewell, and keeping them there while they
      could. They still kept their hands up in reverent salute many steps after
      they had passed by. Every time Joan put her handkerchief to her eyes you
      could see a little quiver of emotion crinkle along the faces of the files.
    </p>
    <p>
      The march-past after a victory is a thing to drive the heart mad with
      jubilation; but this one was a thing to break it.
    </p>
    <p>
      We rode now to the King’s lodgings, which was the Archbishop’s country
      palace; and he was presently ready, and we galloped off and took position
      at the head of the army. By this time the country-people were arriving in
      multitudes from every direction and massing themselves on both sides of
      the road to get sight of Joan—just as had been done every day since
      our first day’s march began. Our march now lay through the grassy plain,
      and those peasants made a dividing double border for that plain. They
      stretched right down through it, a broad belt of bright colors on each
      side of the road; for every peasant girl and woman in it had a white
      jacket on her body and a crimson skirt on the rest of her. Endless borders
      made of poppies and lilies stretching away in front of us—that is
      what it looked like. And that is the kind of lane we had been marching
      through all these days. Not a lane between multitudinous flowers standing
      upright on their stems—no, these flowers were always kneeling;
      kneeling, these human flowers, with their hands and faces lifted toward
      Joan of Arc, and the grateful tears streaming down. And all along, those
      closest to the road hugged her feet and kissed them and laid their wet
      cheeks fondly against them. I never, during all those days, saw any of
      either sex stand while she passed, nor any man keep his head covered.
      Afterward in the Great Trial these touching scenes were used as a weapon
      against her. She had been made an object of adoration by the people, and
      this was proof that she was a heretic—so claimed that unjust court.
    </p>
    <p>
      As we drew near the city the curving long sweep of ramparts and towers was
      gay with fluttering flags and black with masses of people; and all the air
      was vibrant with the crash of artillery and gloomed with drifting clouds
      of smoke. We entered the gates in state and moved in procession through
      the city, with all the guilds and industries in holiday costume marching
      in our rear with their banners; and all the route was hedged with a
      huzzaing crush of people, and all the windows were full and all the roofs;
      and from the balconies hung costly stuffs of rich colors; and the waving
      of handkerchiefs, seen in perspective through a long vista, was like a
      snowstorm.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s name had been introduced into the prayers of the Church—an
      honor theretofore restricted to royalty. But she had a dearer honor and an
      honor more to be proud of, from a humbler source: the common people had
      had leaden medals struck which bore her effigy and her escutcheon, and
      these they wore as charms. One saw them everywhere.
    </p>
    <p>
      From the Archbishop’s Palace, where we halted, and where the King and Joan
      were to lodge, the King sent to the Abbey Church of St. Remi, which was
      over toward the gate by which we had entered the city, for the Sainte
      Ampoule, or flask of holy oil. This oil was not earthly oil; it was made
      in heaven; the flask also. The flask, with the oil in it, was brought down
      from heaven by a dove. It was sent down to St. Remi just as he was going
      to baptize King Clovis, who had become a Christian. I know this to be
      true. I had known it long before; for Pere Fronte told me in Domremy. I
      cannot tell you how strange and awful it made me feel when I saw that
      flask and knew I was looking with my own eyes upon a thing which had
      actually been in heaven, a thing which had been seen by angels, perhaps;
      and by God Himself of a certainty, for He sent it. And I was looking upon
      it—I. At one time I could have touched it. But I was afraid; for I
      could not know but that God had touched it. It is most probable that He
      had.
    </p>
    <p>
      From this flask Clovis had been anointed; and from it all the kings of
      France had been anointed since. Yes, ever since the time of Clovis, and
      that was nine hundred years. And so, as I have said, that flask of holy
      oil was sent for, while we waited. A coronation without that would not
      have been a coronation at all, in my belief.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now in order to get the flask, a most ancient ceremonial had to be gone
      through with; otherwise the Abby of St. Remi hereditary guardian in
      perpetuity of the oil, would not deliver it. So, in accordance with
      custom, the King deputed five great nobles to ride in solemn state and
      richly armed and accoutered, they and their steeds, to the Abbey Church as
      a guard of honor to the Archbishop of Rheims and his canons, who were to
      bear the King’s demand for the oil. When the five great lords were ready
      to start, they knelt in a row and put up their mailed hands before their
      faces, palm joined to palm, and swore upon their lives to conduct the
      sacred vessel safely, and safely restore it again to the Church of St.
      Remi after the anointing of the King. The Archbishop and his subordinates,
      thus nobly escorted, took their way to St. Remi. The Archbishop was in
      grand costume, with his miter on his head and his cross in his hand. At
      the door of St. Remi they halted and formed, to receive the holy vial.
      Soon one heard the deep tones of the organ and of chanting men; then one
      saw a long file of lights approaching through the dim church. And so came
      the Abbot, in his sacerdotal panoply, bearing the vial, with his people
      following after. He delivered it, with solemn ceremonies, to the
      Archbishop; then the march back began, and it was most impressive; for it
      moved, the whole way, between two multitudes of men and women who lay flat
      upon their faces and prayed in dumb silence and in dread while that awful
      thing went by that had been in heaven.
    </p>
    <p>
      This August company arrived at the great west door of the cathedral; and
      as the Archbishop entered a noble anthem rose and filled the vast
      building. The cathedral was packed with people—people in thousands.
      Only a wide space down the center had been kept free. Down this space
      walked the Archbishop and his canons, and after them followed those five
      stately figures in splendid harness, each bearing his feudal banner—and
      riding!
    </p>
    <p>
      Oh, that was a magnificent thing to see. Riding down the cavernous
      vastness of the building through the rich lights streaming in long rays
      from the pictured windows—oh, there was never anything so grand!
    </p>
    <p>
      They rode clear to the choir—as much as four hundred feet from the
      door, it was said. Then the Archbishop dismissed them, and they made deep
      obeisance till their plumes touched their horses’ necks, then made those
      proud prancing and mincing and dancing creatures go backward all the way
      to the door—which was pretty to see, and graceful; then they stood
      them on their hind-feet and spun them around and plunged away and
      disappeared.
    </p>
    <p>
      For some minutes there was a deep hush, a waiting pause; a silence so
      profound that it was as if all those packed thousands there were steeped
      in dreamless slumber—why, you could even notice the faintest sounds,
      like the drowsy buzzing of insects; then came a mighty flood of rich
      strains from four hundred silver trumpets, and then, framed in the pointed
      archway of the great west door, appeared Joan and the King. They advanced
      slowly, side by side, through a tempest of welcome—explosion after
      explosion of cheers and cries, mingled with the deep thunders of the organ
      and rolling tides of triumphant song from chanting choirs. Behind Joan and
      the King came the Paladin and the Banner displayed; and a majestic figure
      he was, and most proud and lofty in his bearing, for he knew that the
      people were marking him and taking note of the gorgeous state dress which
      covered his armor.
    </p>
    <p>
      At his side was the Sire d’Albret, proxy for the Constable of France,
      bearing the Sword of State.
    </p>
    <p>
      After these, in order of rank, came a body royally attired representing
      the lay peers of France; it consisted of three princes of the blood, and
      La Tremouille and the young De Laval brothers.
    </p>
    <p>
      These were followed by the representatives of the ecclesiastical peers—the
      Archbishop of Rheims, and the Bishops of Laon, Chalons, Orleans, and one
      other.
    </p>
    <p>
      Behind these came the Grand Staff, all our great generals and famous
      names, and everybody was eager to get a sight of them. Through all the din
      one could hear shouts all along that told you where two of them were:
      “Live the Bastard of Orleans!” “Satan La Hire forever!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The August procession reached its appointed place in time, and the
      solemnities of the Coronation began. They were long and imposing—with
      prayers, and anthems, and sermons, and everything that is right for such
      occasions; and Joan was at the King’s side all these hours, with her
      Standard in her hand. But at last came the grand act: the King took the
      oath, he was anointed with the sacred oil; a splendid personage, followed
      by train-bearers and other attendants, approached, bearing the Crown of
      France upon a cushion, and kneeling offered it. The King seemed to
      hesitate—in fact, did hesitate; for he put out his hand and then
      stopped with it there in the air over the crown, the fingers in the
      attitude of taking hold of it. But that was for only a moment—though
      a moment is a notable something when it stops the heartbeat of twenty
      thousand people and makes them catch their breath. Yes, only a moment;
      then he caught Joan’s eye, and she gave him a look with all the joy of her
      thankful great soul in it; then he smiled, and took the Crown of France in
      his hand, and right finely and right royally lifted it up and set it upon
      his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then what a crash there was! All about us cries and cheers, and the
      chanting of the choirs and groaning of the organ; and outside the
      clamoring of the bells and the booming of the cannon. The fantastic dream,
      the incredible dream, the impossible dream of the peasant-child stood
      fulfilled; the English power was broken, the Heir of France was crowned.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was like one transfigured, so divine was the joy that shone in her
      face as she sank to her knees at the King’s feet and looked up at him
      through her tears. Her lips were quivering, and her words came soft and
      low and broken:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now, O gentle King, is the pleasure of God accomplished according to His
      command that you should come to Rheims and receive the crown that
      belongeth of right to you, and unto none other. My work which was given me
      to do is finished; give me your peace, and let me go back to my mother,
      who is poor and old, and has need of me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The King raised her up, and there before all that host he praised her
      great deeds in most noble terms; and there he confirmed her nobility and
      titles, making her the equal of a count in rank, and also appointed a
      household and officers for her according to her dignity; and then he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You have saved the crown. Speak—require—demand; and
      whatsoever grace you ask it shall be granted, though it make the kingdom
      poor to meet it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Now that was fine, that was royal. Joan was on her knees again
      straightway, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Then, O gentle King, if out of your compassion you will speak the word, I
      pray you give commandment that my village, poor and hard pressed by reason
      of war, may have its taxes remitted.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is so commanded. Say on.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is all.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “All? Nothing but that?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is all. I have no other desire.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But that is nothing—less than nothing. Ask—do not be afraid.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Indeed, I cannot, gentle King. Do not press me. I will not have aught
      else, but only this alone.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The King seemed nonplussed, and stood still a moment, as if trying to
      comprehend and realize the full stature of this strange unselfishness.
      Then he raised his head and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Who has won a kingdom and crowned its King; and all she asks and all she
      will take is this poor grace—and even this is for others, not for
      herself. And it is well; her act being proportioned to the dignity of one
      who carries in her head and heart riches which outvalue any that any King
      could add, though he gave his all. She shall have her way. Now, therefore,
      it is decreed that from this day forth Domremy, natal village of Joan of
      Arc, Deliverer of France, called the Maid of Orleans, is freed from all
      taxation forever.” Whereat the silver horns blew a jubilant blast.
    </p>
    <p>
      There, you see, she had had a vision of this very scene the time she was
      in a trance in the pastures of Domremy and we asked her to name to boon
      she would demand of the King if he should ever chance to tell her she
      might claim one. But whether she had the vision or not, this act showed
      that after all the dizzy grandeurs that had come upon her, she was still
      the same simple, unselfish creature that she was that day.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, Charles VII. remitted those taxes “forever.” Often the gratitude of
      kings and nations fades and their promises are forgotten or deliberately
      violated; but you, who are children of France, should remember with pride
      that France has kept this one faithfully. Sixty-three years have gone by
      since that day. The taxes of the region wherein Domremy lies have been
      collected sixty-three times since then, and all the villages of that
      region have paid except that one—Domremy. The tax-gatherer never
      visits Domremy. Domremy has long ago forgotten what that dread
      sorrow-sowing apparition is like. Sixty-three tax-books have been filed
      meantime, and they lie yonder with the other public records, and any may
      see them that desire it. At the top of every page in the sixty-three books
      stands the name of a village, and below that name its weary burden of
      taxation is figured out and displayed; in the case of all save one. It is
      true, just as I tell you. In each of the sixty-three books there is a page
      headed “Domremi,” but under that name not a figure appears. Where the
      figures should be, there are three words written; and the same words have
      been written every year for all these years; yes, it is a blank page, with
      always those grateful words lettered across the face of it—a
      touching memorial. Thus:
    </p>
    <p>
      __________________________________ | | | DOMREMI | | | | RIEN—LA
      PUCELLE | |__________________________________| “NOTHING—THE MAID OF
      ORLEANS.”
     </p>
    <p>
      How brief it is; yet how much it says! It is the nation speaking. You have
      the spectacle of that unsentimental thing, a Government, making reverence
      to that name and saying to its agent, “Uncover, and pass on; it is France
      that commands.” Yes, the promise has been kept; it will be kept always;
      “forever” was the King’s word. (1) At two o’clock in the afternoon the
      ceremonies of the Coronation came at last to an end; then the procession
      formed once more, with Joan and the King at its head, and took up its
      solemn march through the midst of the church, all instruments and all
      people making such clamor of rejoicing noises as was, indeed, a marvel to
      hear. An so ended the third of the great days of Joan’s life. And how
      close together they stand—May 8th, June 18th, July 17th!
    </p>
    <p>
      (1) IT was faithfully kept during three hundred and sixty years and more;
      then the over-confident octogenarian’s prophecy failed. During the tumult
      of the French Revolution the promise was forgotten and the grace
      withdrawn. It has remained in disuse ever since. Joan never asked to be
      remembered, but France has remembered her with an inextinguishable love
      and reverence; Joan never asked for a statue, but France has lavished them
      upon her; Joan never asked for a church for Domremy, but France is
      building one; Joan never asked for saintship, but even that is impending.
      Everything which Joan of Arc did not ask for has been given her, and with
      a noble profusion; but the one humble little thing which she did ask for
      and get has been taken away from her. There is something infinitely
      pathetic about this. France owes Domremy a hundred years of taxes, and
      could hardly find a citizen within her borders who would vote against the
      payment of the debt. — NOTE BY THE TRANSLATOR.
    </p>
    <h3>
      36 Joan Hears News from Home
    </h3>

    <p>
      WE MOUNTED and rode, a spectacle to remember, a most noble display of rich
      vestments and nodding plumes, and as we moved between the banked
      multitudes they sank down all along abreast of us as we advanced, like
      grain before the reaper, and kneeling hailed with a rousing welcome the
      consecrated King and his companion the Deliverer of France. But by and by
      when we had paraded about the chief parts of the city and were come near
      to the end of our course, we being now approaching the Archbishop’s
      palace, one saw on the right, hard by the inn that is called the Zebra, a
      strange thing—two men not kneeling but standing! Standing in the
      front rank of the kneelers; unconscious, transfixed, staring. Yes, and
      clothed in the coarse garb of the peasantry, these two. Two halberdiers
      sprang at them in a fury to teach them better manners; but just as they
      seized them Joan cried out “Forbear!” and slid from her saddle and flung
      her arms about one of those peasants, calling him by all manner of
      endearing names, and sobbing. For it was her father; and the other was her
      uncle, Laxart.
    </p>
    <p>
      The news flew everywhere, and shouts of welcome were raised, and in just
      one little moment those two despised and unknown plebeians were become
      famous and popular and envied, and everybody was in a fever to get sight
      of them and be able to say, all their lives long, that they had seen the
      father of Joan of Arc and the brother of her mother. How easy it was for
      her to do miracles like to this! She was like the sun; on whatsoever dim
      and humble object her rays fell, that thing was straightway drowned in
      glory.
    </p>
    <p>
      All graciously the King said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Bring them to me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And she brought them; she radiant with happiness and affection, they
      trembling and scared, with their caps in their shaking hands; and there
      before all the world the King gave them his hand to kiss, while the people
      gazed in envy and admiration; and he said to old D’Arc:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Give God thanks for that you are father to this child, this dispenser of
      immortalities. You who bear a name that will still live in the mouths of
      men when all the race of kings has been forgotten, it is not meet that you
      bare your head before the fleeting fames and dignities of a day—cover
      yourself!” And truly he looked right fine and princely when he said that.
      Then he gave order that the Bailly of Rheims be brought; and when he was
      come, and stood bent low and bare, the King said to him, “These two are
      guests of France;” and bade him use them hospitably.
    </p>
    <p>
      I may as well say now as later, that Papa D’Arc and Laxart were stopping
      in that little Zebra inn, and that there they remained. Finer quarters
      were offered them by the Bailly, also public distinctions and brave
      entertainment; but they were frightened at these projects, they being only
      humble and ignorant peasants; so they begged off, and had peace. They
      could not have enjoyed such things. Poor souls, they did not even know
      what to do with their hands, and it took all their attention to keep from
      treading on them. The Bailly did the best he could in the circumstances.
      He made the innkeeper place a whole floor at their disposal, and told him
      to provide everything they might desire, and charge all to the city. Also
      the Bailly gave them a horse apiece and furnishings; which so overwhelmed
      them with pride and delight and astonishment that they couldn’t speak a
      word; for in their lives they had never dreamed of wealth like this, and
      could not believe, at first, that the horses were real and would not
      dissolve to a mist and blow away. They could not unglue their minds from
      those grandeurs, and were always wrenching the conversation out of its
      groove and dragging the matter of animals into it, so that they could say
      “my horse” here, and “my horse” there and yonder and all around, and taste
      the words and lick their chops over them, and spread their legs and hitch
      their thumbs in their armpits, and feel as the good God feels when He
      looks out on His fleets of constellations plowing the awful deeps of space
      and reflects with satisfaction that they are His—all His. Well, they
      were the happiest old children one ever saw, and the simplest.
    </p>
    <p>
      The city gave a grand banquet to the King and Joan in mid-afternoon, and
      to the Court and the Grand Staff; and about the middle of it Pere D’Arc
      and Laxart were sent for, but would not venture until it was promised that
      they might sit in a gallery and be all by themselves and see all that was
      to be seen and yet be unmolested. And so they sat there and looked down
      upon the splendid spectacle, and were moved till the tears ran down their
      cheeks to see the unbelievable honors that were paid to their small
      darling, and how naively serene and unafraid she sat there with those
      consuming glories beating upon her.
    </p>
    <p>
      But at last her serenity was broken up. Yes, it stood the strain of the
      King’s gracious speech; and of D’Alencon’s praiseful words, and the
      Bastard’s; and even La Hire’s thunder-blast, which took the place by
      storm; but at last, as I have said, they brought a force to bear which was
      too strong for her. For at the close the King put up his hand to command
      silence, and so waited, with his hand up, till every sound was dead and it
      was as if one could almost the stillness, so profound it was. Then out of
      some remote corner of that vast place there rose a plaintive voice, and in
      tones most tender and sweet and rich came floating through that enchanted
      hush our poor old simple song “L’Arbre Fee Bourlemont!” and then Joan
      broke down and put her face in her hands and cried. Yes, you see, all in a
      moment the pomps and grandeurs dissolved away and she was a little child
      again herding her sheep with the tranquil pastures stretched about her,
      and war and wounds and blood and death and the mad frenzy and turmoil of
      battle a dream. Ah, that shows you the power of music, that magician of
      magicians, who lifts his wand and says his mysterious word and all things
      real pass away and the phantoms of your mind walk before you clothed in
      flesh.
    </p>
    <p>
      That was the King’s invention, that sweet and dear surprise. Indeed, he
      had fine things hidden away in his nature, though one seldom got a glimpse
      of them, with that scheming Tremouille and those others always standing in
      the light, and he so indolently content to save himself fuss and argument
      and let them have their way.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the fall of night we the Domremy contingent of the personal staff were
      with the father and uncle at the inn, in their private parlor, brewing
      generous drinks and breaking ground for a homely talk about Domremy and
      the neighbors, when a large parcel arrived from Joan to be kept till she
      came; and soon she came herself and sent her guard away, saying she would
      take one of her father’s rooms and sleep under his roof, and so be at home
      again. We of the staff rose and stood, as was meet, until she made us sit.
      Then she turned and saw that the two old men had gotten up too, and were
      standing in an embarrassed and unmilitary way; which made her want to
      laugh, but she kept it in, as not wishing to hurt them; and got them to
      their seats and snuggled down between them, and took a hand of each of
      them upon her knees and nestled her own hands in them, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now we will nave no more ceremony, but be kin and playmates as in other
      times; for I am done with the great wars now, and you two will take me
      home with you, and I shall see—” She stopped, and for a moment her
      happy face sobered, as if a doubt or a presentiment had flitted through
      her mind; then it cleared again, and she said, with a passionate yearning,
      “Oh, if the day were but come and we could start!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The old father was surprised, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Why, child, are you in earnest? Would you leave doing these wonders that
      make you to be praised by everybody while there is still so much glory to
      be won; and would you go out from this grand comradeship with princes and
      generals to be a drudging villager again and a nobody? It is not
      rational.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No,” said the uncle, Laxart, “it is amazing to hear, and indeed not
      understandable. It is a stranger thing to hear her say she will stop the
      soldiering that it was to hear her say she would begin it; and I who speak
      to you can say in all truth that that was the strangest word that ever I
      had heard till this day and hour. I would it could be explained.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is not difficult,” said Joan. “I was not ever fond of wounds and
      suffering, nor fitted by my nature to inflict them; and quarrelings did
      always distress me, and noise and tumult were against my liking, my
      disposition being toward peace and quietness, and love for all things that
      have life; and being made like this, how could I bear to think of wars and
      blood, and the pain that goes with them, and the sorrow and mourning that
      follow after? But by his angels God laid His great commands upon me, and
      could I disobey? I did as I was bid. Did He command me to do many things?
      No; only two: to raise the siege of Orleans, and crown the King at Rheims.
      The task is finished, and I am free. Has ever a poor soldier fallen in my
      sight, whether friend or foe, and I not felt the pain in my own body, and
      the grief of his home-mates in my own heart? No, not one; and, oh, it is
      such bliss to know that my release is won, and that I shall not any more
      see these cruel things or suffer these tortures of the mind again! Then
      why should I not go to my village and be as I was before? It is heaven!
      and ye wonder that I desire it. Ah, ye are men—just men! My mother
      would understand.”
     </p>
    <p>
      They didn’t quite know what to say; so they sat still awhile, looking
      pretty vacant. Then old D’Arc said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, your mother—that is true. I never saw such a woman. She
      worries, and worries, and worries; and wakes nights, and lies so, thinking—that
      is, worrying; worrying about you. And when the night storms go raging
      along, she moans and says, ‘Ah, God pity her, she is out in this with her
      poor wet soldiers.’ And when the lightning glares and the thunder crashes
      she wrings her hands and trembles, saying, ‘It is like the awful cannon
      and the flash, and yonder somewhere she is riding down upon the spouting
      guns and I not there to protect her.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, poor mother, it is pity, it is pity!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, a most strange woman, as I have noticed a many times. When there is
      news of a victory and all the village goes mad with pride and joy, she
      rushes here and there in a maniacal frenzy till she finds out the one only
      thing she cares to know—that you are safe; then down she goes on her
      knees in the dirt and praises God as long as there is any breath left in
      her body; and all on your account, for she never mentions the battle once.
      And always she says, ‘Now it is over—now France is saved—now
      she will come home’—and always is disappointed and goes about
      mourning.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Don’t, father! it breaks my heart. I will be so good to her when I get
      home. I will do her work for her, and be her comfort, and she shall not
      suffer any more through me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was some more talk of this sort, then Uncle Laxart said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You have done the will of God, dear, and are quits; it is true, and none
      may deny it; but what of the King? You are his best soldier; what if he
      command you to stay?”
     </p>
    <p>
      That was a crusher—and sudden! It took Joan a moment or two to
      recover from the shock of it; then she said, quite simply and resignedly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The King is my Lord; I am his servant.” She was silent and thoughtful a
      little while, then she brightened up and said, cheerily, “But let us drive
      such thoughts away—this is no time for them. Tell me about home.”
     </p>
    <p>
      So the two old gossips talked and talked; talked about everything and
      everybody in the village; and it was good to hear. Joan out of her
      kindness tried to get us into the conversation, but that failed, of
      course. She was the Commander-in-Chief, we were nobodies; her name was the
      mightiest in France, we were invisible atoms; she was the comrade of
      princes and heroes, we of the humble and obscure; she held rank above all
      Personages and all Puissances whatsoever in the whole earth, by right of
      baring her commission direct from God. To put it in one word, she was JOAN
      OF ARC—and when that is said, all is said. To us she was divine.
      Between her and us lay the bridgeless abyss which that word implies. We
      could not be familiar with her. No, you can see yourselves that that would
      have been impossible.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet she was so human, too, and so good and kind and dear and loving
      and cheery and charming and unspoiled and unaffected! Those are all the
      words I think of now, but they are not enough; no, they are too few and
      colorless and meager to tell it all, or tell the half. Those simple old
      men didn’t realize her; they couldn’t; they had never known any people but
      human beings, and so they had no other standard to measure her by. To
      them, after their first little shyness had worn off, she was just a girl—that
      was all. It was amazing. It made one shiver, sometimes, to see how calm
      and easy and comfortable they were in her presence, and hear them talk to
      her exactly as they would have talked to any other girl in France.
    </p>
    <p>
      Why, that simple old Laxart sat up there and droned out the most tedious
      and empty tale one ever heard, and neither he nor Papa D’Arc ever gave a
      thought to the badness of the etiquette of it, or ever suspected that that
      foolish tale was anything but dignified and valuable history. There was
      not an atom of value in it; and whilst they thought it distressing and
      pathetic, it was in fact not pathetic at all, but actually ridiculous. At
      least it seemed so to me, and it seems so yet. Indeed, I know it was,
      because it made Joan laugh; and the more sorrowful it got the more it made
      her laugh; and the Paladin said that he could have laughed himself if she
      had not been there, and Noel Rainguesson said the same. It was about old
      Laxart going to a funeral there at Domremy two or three weeks back. He had
      spots all over his face and hands, and he got Joan to rub some healing
      ointment on them, and while she was doing it, and comforting him, and
      trying to say pitying things to him, he told her how it happened. And
      first he asked her if she remembered that black bull calf that she left
      behind when she came away, and she said indeed she did, and he was a dear,
      and she loved him so, and was he well?—and just drowned him in
      questions about that creature. And he said it was a young bull now, and
      very frisky; and he was to bear a principal hand at a funeral; and she
      said, “The bull?” and he said, “No, myself”; but said the bull did take a
      hand, but not because of his being invited, for he wasn’t; but anyway he
      was away over beyond the Fairy Tree, and fell asleep on the grass with his
      Sunday funeral clothes on, and a long black rag on his hat and hanging
      down his back; and when he woke he saw by the sun how late it was, and not
      a moment to lose; and jumped up terribly worried, and saw the young bull
      grazing there, and thought maybe he could ride part way on him and gain
      time; so he tied a rope around the bull’s body to hold on by, and put a
      halter on him to steer with, and jumped on and started; but it was all new
      to the bull, and he was discontented with it, and scurried around and
      bellowed and reared and pranced, and Uncle Laxart was satisfied, and
      wanted to get off and go by the next bull or some other way that was
      quieter, but he didn’t dare try; and it was getting very warm for him,
      too, and disturbing and wearisome, and not proper for Sunday; but by and
      by the bull lost all his temper, and went tearing down the slope with his
      tail in the air and blowing in the most awful way; and just in the edge of
      the village he knocked down some beehives, and the bees turned out and
      joined the excursion, and soared along in a black cloud that nearly hid
      those other two from sight, and prodded them both, and jabbed them and
      speared them and spiked them, and made them bellow and shriek, and shriek
      and bellow; and here they came roaring through the village like a
      hurricane, and took the funeral procession right in the center, and sent
      that section of it sprawling, and galloped over it, and the rest scattered
      apart and fled screeching in every direction, every person with a layer of
      bees on him, and not a rag of that funeral left but the corpse; and
      finally the bull broke for the river and jumped in, and when they fished
      Uncle Laxart out he was nearly drowned, and his face looked like a pudding
      with raisins in it. And then he turned around, this old simpleton, and
      looked a long time in a dazed way at Joan where she had her face in a
      cushion, dying, apparently, and says:
    </p>
    <p>
      “What do you reckon she is laughing at?”
     </p>
    <p>
      And old D’Arc stood looking at her the same way, sort of absently
      scratching his head; but had to give it up, and said he didn’t know—“must
      have been something that happened when we weren’t noticing.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Yes, both of those old people thought that that tale was pathetic; whereas
      to my mind it was purely ridiculous, and not in any way valuable to any
      one. It seemed so to me then, and it seems so to me yet. And as for
      history, it does not resemble history; for the office of history is to
      furnish serious and important facts that teach; whereas this strange and
      useless event teaches nothing; nothing that I can see, except not to ride
      a bull to a funeral; and surely no reflecting person needs to be taught
      that.
    </p>
    <h3>
      37 Again to Arms
    </h3>
    <p>
      NOW THESE were nobles, you know, by decree of the King!—these
      precious old infants. But they did not realize it; they could not be
      called conscious of it; it was an abstraction, a phantom; to them it had
      no substance; their minds could not take hold of it. No, they did not
      bother about their nobility; they lived in their horses. The horses were
      solid; they were visible facts, and would make a mighty stir in Domremy.
      Presently something was said about the Coronation, and old D’Arc said it
      was going to be a grand thing to be able to say, when they got home, that
      they were present in the very town itself when it happened. Joan looked
      troubled, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, that reminds me. You were here and you didn’t send me word. In the
      town, indeed! Why, you could have sat with the other nobles, and been
      welcome; and could have looked upon the crowning itself, and carried that
      home to tell. Ah, why did you use me so, and send me no word?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The old father was embarrassed, now, quite visibly embarrassed, and had
      the air of one who does not quite know what to say. But Joan was looking
      up in his face, her hands upon his shoulders—waiting. He had to
      speak; so presently he drew her to his breast, which was heaving with
      emotion; and he said, getting out his words with difficulty:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There, hide your face, child, and let your old father humble himself and
      make his confession. I—I—don’t you see, don’t you understand?—I
      could not know that these grandeurs would not turn your young head—it
      would be only natural. I might shame you before these great per—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Father!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And then I was afraid, as remembering that cruel thing I said once in my
      sinful anger. Oh, appointed of God to be a soldier, and the greatest in
      the land! and in my ignorant anger I said I would drown you with my own
      hands if you unsexed yourself and brought shame to your name and family.
      Ah, how could I ever have said it, and you so good and dear and innocent!
      I was afraid; for I was guilty. You understand it now, my child, and you
      forgive?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Do you see? Even that poor groping old land-crab, with his skull full of
      pulp, had pride. Isn’t it wonderful? And more—he had conscience; he
      had a sense of right and wrong, such as it was; he was able to find
      remorse. It looks impossible, it looks incredible, but it is not. I
      believe that some day it will be found out that peasants are people. Yes,
      beings in a great many respects like ourselves. And I believe that some
      day they will find this out, too—and then! Well, then I think they
      will rise up and demand to be regarded as part of the race, and that by
      consequence there will be trouble. Whenever one sees in a book or in a
      king’s proclamation those words “the nation,” they bring before us the
      upper classes; only those; we know no other “nation”; for us and the kings
      no other “nation” exists. But from the day that I saw old D’Arc the
      peasant acting and feeling just as I should have acted and felt myself, I
      have carried the conviction in my heart that our peasants are not merely
      animals, beasts of burden put here by the good God to produce food and
      comfort for the “nation,” but something more and better. You look
      incredulous. Well, that is your training; it is the training of everybody;
      but as for me, I thank that incident for giving me a better light, and I
      have never forgotten it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Let me see—where was I? One’s mind wanders around here and there and
      yonder, when one is old. I think I said Joan comforted him. Certainly,
      that is what she would do—there was no need to say that. She coaxed
      him and petted him and caressed him, and laid the memory of that old hard
      speech of his to rest. Laid it to rest until she should be dead. Then he
      would remember it again—yes, yes! Lord, how those things sting, and
      burn, and gnaw—the things which we did against the innocent dead!
      And we say in our anguish, “If they could only come back!” Which is all
      very well to say, but, as far as I can see, it doesn’t profit anything. In
      my opinion the best way is not to do the thing in the first place. And I
      am not alone in this; I have heard our two knights say the same thing; and
      a man there in Orleans—no, I believe it was at Beaugency, or one of
      those places—it seems more as if it was at Beaugency than the others—this
      man said the same thing exactly; almost the same words; a dark man with a
      cast in his eye and one leg shorter than the other. His name was—was—it
      is singular that I can’t call that man’s name; I had it in my mind only a
      moment ago, and I know it begins with—no, I don’t remember what it
      begins with; but never mind, let it go; I will think of it presently, and
      then I will tell you.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, pretty soon the old father wanted to know how Joan felt when she was
      in the thick of a battle, with the bright blades hacking and flashing all
      around her, and the blows rapping and slatting on her shield, and blood
      gushing on her from the cloven ghastly face and broken teeth of the
      neighbor at her elbow, and the perilous sudden back surge of massed horses
      upon a person when the front ranks give way before a heavy rush of the
      enemy, and men tumble limp and groaning out of saddles all around, and
      battle-flags falling from dead hands wipe across one’s face and hide the
      tossing turmoil a moment, and in the reeling and swaying and laboring
      jumble one’s horse’s hoofs sink into soft substances and shrieks of pain
      respond, and presently—panic! rush! swarm! flight! and death and
      hell following after! And the old fellow got ever so much excited; and
      strode up and down, his tongue going like a mill, asking question after
      question and never waiting for an answer; and finally he stood Joan up in
      the middle of the room and stepped off and scanned her critically, and
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “No—I don’t understand it. You are so little. So little and slender.
      When you had your armor on, to-day, it gave one a sort of notion of it;
      but in these pretty silks and velvets, you are only a dainty page, not a
      league-striding war-colossus, moving in clouds and darkness and breathing
      smoke and thunder. I would God I might see you at it and go tell your
      mother! That would help her sleep, poor thing! Here—teach me the
      arts of the soldier, that I may explain them to her.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And she did it. She gave him a pike, and put him through the manual of
      arms; and made him do the steps, too. His marching was incredibly awkward
      and slovenly, and so was his drill with the pike; but he didn’t know it,
      and was wonderfully pleased with himself, and mightily excited and charmed
      with the ringing, crisp words of command. I am obliged to say that if
      looking proud and happy when one is marching were sufficient, he would
      have been the perfect soldier.
    </p>
    <p>
      And he wanted a lesson in sword-play, and got it. But of course that was
      beyond him; he was too old. It was beautiful to see Joan handle the foils,
      but the old man was a bad failure. He was afraid of the things, and
      skipped and dodged and scrambled around like a woman who has lost her mind
      on account of the arrival of a bat. He was of no good as an exhibition.
      But if La Hire had only come in, that would have been another matter.
      Those two fenced often; I saw them many times. True, Joan was easily his
      master, but it made a good show for all that, for La Hire was a grand
      swordsman. What a swift creature Joan was! You would see her standing
      erect with her ankle-bones together and her foil arched over her head, the
      hilt in one hand and the button in the other—the old general
      opposite, bent forward, left hand reposing on his back, his foil advanced,
      slightly wiggling and squirming, his watching eye boring straight into
      hers—and all of a sudden she would give a spring forward, and back
      again; and there she was, with the foil arched over her head as before. La
      Hire had been hit, but all that the spectator saw of it was a something
      like a thin flash of light in the air, but nothing distinct, nothing
      definite.
    </p>
    <p>
      We kept the drinkables moving, for that would please the Bailly and the
      landlord; and old Laxart and D’Arc got to feeling quite comfortable, but
      without being what you could call tipsy. They got out the presents which
      they had been buying to carry home—humble things and cheap, but they
      would be fine there, and welcome. And they gave to Joan a present from
      Pere Fronte and one from her mother—the one a little leaden image of
      the Holy Virgin, the other half a yard of blue silk ribbon; and she was as
      pleased as a child; and touched, too, as one could see plainly enough.
      Yes, she kissed those poor things over and over again, as if they had been
      something costly and wonderful; and she pinned the Virgin on her doublet,
      and sent for her helmet and tied the ribbon on that; first one way, then
      another; then a new way, then another new way; and with each effort
      perching the helmet on her hand and holding it off this way and that, and
      canting her head to one side and then the other, examining the effect, as
      a bird does when it has got a new bug. And she said she could almost wish
      she was going to the wars again; for then she would fight with the better
      courage, as having always with her something which her mother’s touch had
      blessed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Old Laxart said he hoped she would go to the wars again, but home first,
      for that all the people there were cruel anxious to see her—and so
      he went on:
    </p>
    <p>
      “They are proud of you, dear. Yes, prouder than any village ever was of
      anybody before. And indeed it is right and rational; for it is the first
      time a village has ever had anybody like you to be proud of and call its
      own. And it is strange and beautiful how they try to give your name to
      every creature that has a sex that is convenient. It is but half a year
      since you began to be spoken of and left us, and so it is surprising to
      see how many babies there are already in that region that are named for
      you. First it was just Joan; then it was Joan-Orleans; then
      Joan-Orleans-Beaugency-Patay; and now the next ones will have a lot of
      towns and the Coronation added, of course. Yes, and the animals the same.
      They know how you love animals, and so they try to do you honor and show
      their love for you by naming all those creatures after you; insomuch that
      if a body should step out and call ‘Joan of Arc—come!’ there would
      be a landslide of cats and all such things, each supposing it was the one
      wanted, and all willing to take the benefit of the doubt, anyway, for the
      sake of the food that might be on delivery. The kitten you left behind—the
      last stray you fetched home—bears you name, now, and belongs to Pere
      Fronte, and is the pet and pride of the village; and people have come
      miles to look at it and pet it and stare at it and wonder over it because
      it was Joan of Arc’s cat. Everybody will tell you that; and one day when a
      stranger threw a stone at it, not knowing it was your cat, the village
      rose against him as one man and hanged him! And but for Pere Fronte—”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was an interruption. It was a messenger from the King, bearing a
      note for Joan, which I read to her, saying he had reflected, and had
      consulted his other generals, and was obliged to ask her to remain at the
      head of the army and withdraw her resignation. Also, would she come
      immediately and attend a council of war? Straightway, at a little
      distance, military commands and the rumble of drums broke on the still
      night, and we knew that her guard was approaching.
    </p>
    <p>
      Deep disappointment clouded her face for just one moment and no more—it
      passed, and with it the homesick girl, and she was Joan of Arc,
      Commander-in-Chief again, and ready for duty.
    </p>
    <h3>
      38 The King Cries “Forward!”
     </h3>
    <p>
      IN MY double quality of page and secretary I followed Joan to the council.
      She entered that presence with the bearing of a grieved goddess. What was
      become of the volatile child that so lately was enchanted with a ribbon
      and suffocated with laughter over the distress of a foolish peasant who
      had stormed a funeral on the back of a bee-stung bull? One may not guess.
      Simply it was gone, and had left no sign. She moved straight to the
      council-table, and stood. Her glance swept from face to face there, and
      where it fell, these lit it as with a torch, those it scorched as with a
      brand. She knew where to strike. She indicated the generals with a nod,
      and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “My business is not with you. You have not craved a council of war.” Then
      she turned toward the King’s privy council, and continued: “No; it is with
      you. A council of war! It is amazing. There is but one thing to do, and
      only one, and lo, ye call a council of war! Councils of war have no value
      but to decide between two or several doubtful courses. But a council of
      war when there is only one course? Conceive of a man in a boat and his
      family in the water, and he goes out among his friends to ask what he
      would better do? A council of war, name of God! To determine what?”
     </p>
    <p>
      She stopped, and turned till her eyes rested upon the face of La
      Tremouille; and so she stood, silent, measuring him, the excitement in all
      faces burning steadily higher and higher, and all pulses beating faster
      and faster; then she said, with deliberation:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Every sane man—whose loyalty is to his King and not a show and a
      pretense—knows that there is but one rational thing before us—the
      march upon Paris!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Down came the fist of La Hire with an approving crash upon the table. La
      Tremouille turned white with anger, but he pulled himself firmly together
      and held his peace. The King’s lazy blood was stirred and his eye kindled
      finely, for the spirit of war was away down in him somewhere, and a frank,
      bold speech always found it and made it tingle gladsomely. Joan waited to
      see if the chief minister might wish to defend his position; but he was
      experienced and wise, and not a man to waste his forces where the current
      was against him. He would wait; the King’s private ear would be at his
      disposal by and by.
    </p>
    <p>
      That pious fox the Chancellor of France took the word now. He washed his
      soft hands together, smiling persuasively, and said to Joan:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Would it be courteous, your Excellency, to move abruptly from here
      without waiting for an answer from the Duke of Burgundy? You may not know
      that we are negotiating with his Highness, and that there is likely to be
      a fortnight’s truce between us; and on his part a pledge to deliver Paris
      into our hands without the cost of a blow or the fatigue of a march
      thither.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan turned to him and said, gravely:
    </p>
    <p>
      “This is not a confessional, my lord. You were not obliged to expose that
      shame here.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Chancellor’s face reddened, and he retorted:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Shame? What is there shameful about it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan answered in level, passionless tones:
    </p>
    <p>
      “One may describe it without hunting far for words. I knew of this poor
      comedy, my lord, although it was not intended that I should know. It is to
      the credit of the devisers of it that they tried to conceal it—this
      comedy whose text and impulse are describable in two words.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Chancellor spoke up with a fine irony in his manner:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Indeed? And will your Excellency be good enough to utter them?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Cowardice and treachery!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The fists of all the generals came down this time, and again the King’s
      eye sparkled with pleasure. The Chancellor sprang to his feet and appealed
      to his Majesty:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Sire, I claim your protection.”
     </p>
    <p>
      But the King waved him to his seat again, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Peace. She had a right to be consulted before that thing was undertaken,
      since it concerned war as well as politics. It is but just that she be
      heard upon it now.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Chancellor sat down trembling with indignation, and remarked to Joan:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Out of charity I will consider that you did not know who devised this
      measure which you condemn in so candid language.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Save your charity for another occasion, my lord,” said Joan, as calmly as
      before. “Whenever anything is done to injure the interests and degrade the
      honor of France, all but the dead know how to name the two
      conspirators-in-chief—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Sir, sire! this insinuation—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is not an insinuation, my lord,” said Joan, placidly, “it is a charge.
      I bring it against the King’s chief minister and his Chancellor.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Both men were on their feet now, insisting that the King modify Joan’s
      frankness; but he was not minded to do it. His ordinary councils were
      stale water—his spirit was drinking wine, now, and the taste of it
      was good. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Sit—and be patient. What is fair for one must in fairness be
      allowed the other. Consider—and be just. When have you two spared
      her? What dark charges and harsh names have you withheld when you spoke of
      her?” Then he added, with a veiled twinkle in his eyes, “If these are
      offenses I see no particular difference between them, except that she says
      her hard things to your faces, whereas you say yours behind her back.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He was pleased with that neat shot and the way it shriveled those two
      people up, and made La Hire laugh out loud and the other generals softly
      quake and chuckle. Joan tranquilly resumed:
    </p>
    <p>
      “From the first, we have been hindered by this policy of shilly-shally;
      this fashion of counseling and counseling and counseling where no
      counseling is needed, but only fighting. We took Orleans on the 8th of
      May, and could have cleared the region round about in three days and saved
      the slaughter of Patay. We could have been in Rheims six weeks ago, and in
      Paris now; and would see the last Englishman pass out of France in half a
      year. But we struck no blow after Orleans, but went off into the country—what
      for? Ostensibly to hold councils; really to give Bedford time to send
      reinforcements to Talbot—which he did; and Patay had to be fought.
      After Patay, more counseling, more waste of precious time. Oh, my King, I
      would that you would be persuaded!” She began to warm up, now. “Once more
      we have our opportunity. If we rise and strike, all is well. Bid me march
      upon Paris. In twenty days it shall be yours, and in six months all
      France! Here is half a year’s work before us; if this chance be wasted, I
      give you twenty years to do it in. Speak the word, O gentle King—speak
      but the one—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I cry you mercy!” interrupted the Chancellor, who saw a dangerous
      enthusiasm rising in the King’s face. “March upon Paris? Does your
      Excellency forget that the way bristles with English strongholds?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That for your English strongholds!” and Joan snapped her fingers
      scornfully. “Whence have we marched in these last days? From Gien. And
      whither? To Rheims. What bristled between? English strongholds. What are
      they now? French ones—and they never cost a blow!” Here applause
      broke out from the group of generals, and Joan had to pause a moment to
      let it subside. “Yes, English strongholds bristled before us; now French
      ones bristle behind us. What is the argument? A child can read it. The
      strongholds between us and Paris are garrisoned by no new breed of
      English, but by the same breed as those others—with the same fears,
      the same questionings, the same weaknesses, the same disposition to see
      the heavy hand of God descending upon them. We have but to march!—on
      the instant—and they are ours, Paris is ours, France is ours! Give
      the word, O my King, command your servant to—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Stay!” cried the Chancellor. “It would be madness to put our affront upon
      his Highness the Duke of Burgundy. By the treaty which we have every hope
      to make with him—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, the treaty which we hope to make with him! He has scorned you for
      years, and defied you. Is it your subtle persuasions that have softened
      his manners and beguiled him to listen to proposals? No; it was blows!—the
      blows which we gave him! That is the only teaching that that sturdy rebel
      can understand. What does he care for wind? The treaty which we hope to
      make with him—alack! He deliver Paris! There is no pauper in the
      land that is less able to do it. He deliver Paris! Ah, but that would make
      great Bedford smile! Oh, the pitiful pretext! the blind can see that this
      thin pour-parler with its fifteen-day truce has no purpose but to give
      Bedford time to hurry forward his forces against us. More treachery—always
      treachery! We call a council of war—with nothing to council about;
      but Bedford calls no council to teach him what our course is. He knows
      what he would do in our place. He would hang his traitors and march upon
      Paris! O gentle King, rouse! The way is open, Paris beckons, France
      implores, Speak and we—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Sire, it is madness, sheer madness! Your Excellency, we cannot, we must
      not go back from what we have done; we have proposed to treat, we must
      treat with the Duke of Burgundy.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And we will!” said Joan.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah? How?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “At the point of the lance!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The house rose, to a man—all that had French hearts—and let go
      a crack of applause—and kept it up; and in the midst of it one heard
      La Hire growl out: “At the point of the lance! By God, that is music!” The
      King was up, too, and drew his sword, and took it by the blade and strode
      to Joan and delivered the hilt of it into her hand, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There, the King surrenders. Carry it to Paris.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And so the applause burst out again, and the historical council of war
      that has bred so many legends was over.
    </p>
    <h3>
      39 We Win, But the King Balks
    </h3>

    <p>
      IT WAS away past midnight, and had been a tremendous day in the matter of
      excitement and fatigue, but that was no matter to Joan when there was
      business on hand. She did not think of bed. The generals followed her to
      her official quarters, and she delivered her orders to them as fast as she
      could talk, and they sent them off to their different commands as fast as
      delivered; wherefore the messengers galloping hither and thither raised a
      world of clatter and racket in the still streets; and soon were added to
      this the music of distant bugles and the roll of drums—notes of
      preparation; for the vanguard would break camp at dawn.
    </p>
    <p>
      The generals were soon dismissed, but I wasn’t; nor Joan; for it was my
      turn to work, now. Joan walked the floor and dictated a summons to the
      Duke of Burgundy to lay down his arms and make peace and exchange pardons
      with the King; or, if he must fight, go fight the Saracens.
      “Pardonnez-vous l’un—l’autre de bon coeligeur, entierement, ainsi
      que doivent faire loyaux chretiens, et, s’il vous plait de guerroyer,
      allez contre les Sarrasins.” It was long, but it was good, and had the
      sterling ring to it. It is my opinion that it was as fine and simple and
      straightforward and eloquent a state paper as she ever uttered.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was delivered into the hands of a courier, and he galloped away with
      it. The Joan dismissed me, and told me to go to the inn and stay, and in
      the morning give to her father the parcel which she had left there. It
      contained presents for the Domremy relatives and friends and a peasant
      dress which she had bought for herself. She said she would say good-by to
      her father and uncle in the morning if it should still be their purpose to
      go, instead of tarrying awhile to see the city.
    </p>
    <p>
      I didn’t say anything, of course, but I could have said that wild horses
      couldn’t keep those men in that town half a day. They waste the glory of
      being the first to carry the great news to Domremy—the taxes
      remitted forever!—and hear the bells clang and clatter, and the
      people cheer and shout? Oh, not they. Patay and Orleans and the Coronation
      were events which in a vague way these men understood to be colossal; but
      they were colossal mists, films, abstractions; this was a gigantic
      reality!
    </p>
    <p>
      When I got there, do you suppose they were abed! Quite the reverse. They
      and the rest were as mellow as mellow could be; and the Paladin was doing
      his battles in great style, and the old peasants were endangering the
      building with their applause. He was doing Patay now; and was bending his
      big frame forward and laying out the positions and movements with a rake
      here and a rake there of his formidable sword on the floor, and the
      peasants were stooped over with their hands on their spread knees
      observing with excited eyes and ripping out ejaculations of wonder and
      admiration all along:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, here we were, waiting—waiting for the word; our horses
      fidgeting and snorting and dancing to get away, we lying back on the
      bridles till our bodies fairly slanted to the rear; the word rang out at
      last—‘Go!’ and we went!
    </p>
    <p>
      “Went? There was nothing like it ever seen! Where we swept by squads of
      scampering English, the mere wind of our passage laid them flat in piles
      and rows! Then we plunged into the ruck of Fastolfe’s frantic battle-corps
      and tore through it like a hurricane, leaving a causeway of the dead
      stretching far behind; no tarrying, no slacking rein, but on! on! on! far
      yonder in the distance lay our prey—Talbot and his host looming vast
      and dark like a storm-cloud brooding on the sea! Down we swooped upon
      them, glooming all the air with a quivering pall of dead leaves flung up
      by the whirlwind of our flight. In another moment we should have struck
      them as world strikes world when disorbited constellations crash into the
      Milky way, but by misfortune and the inscrutable dispensation of God I was
      recognized! Talbot turned white, and shouting, ‘Save yourselves, it is the
      Standard-Bearer of Joan of Arc!’ drove his spurs home till they met in the
      middle of his horse’s entrails, and fled the field with his billowing
      multitudes at his back! I could have cursed myself for not putting on a
      disguise. I saw reproach in the eyes of her Excellency, and was bitterly
      ashamed. I had caused what seemed an irreparable disaster. Another might
      have gone aside to grieve, as not seeing any way to mend it; but I thank
      God I am not of those. Great occasions only summon as with a trumpet-call
      the slumbering reserves of my intellect. I saw my opportunity in an
      instant—in the next I was away! Through the woods I vanished—fst!—like
      an extinguished light! Away around through the curtaining forest I sped,
      as if on wings, none knowing what was become of me, none suspecting my
      design. Minute after minute passed, on and on I flew; on, and still on;
      and at last with a great cheer I flung my Banner to the breeze and burst
      out in front of Talbot! Oh, it was a mighty thought! That weltering chaos
      of distracted men whirled and surged backward like a tidal wave which has
      struck a continent, and the day was ours! Poor helpless creatures, they
      were in a trap; they were surrounded; they could not escape to the rear,
      for there was our army; they could not escape to the front, for there was
      I. Their hearts shriveled in their bodies, their hands fell listless at
      their sides. They stood still, and at our leisure we slaughtered them to a
      man; all except Talbot and Fastolfe, whom I saved and brought away, one
      under each arm.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Well, there is no denying it, the Paladin was in great form that night.
      Such style! such noble grace of gesture, such grandeur of attitude, such
      energy when he got going! such steady rise, on such sure wing, such nicely
      graduated expenditures of voice according to the weight of the matter,
      such skilfully calculated approaches to his surprises and explosions, such
      belief-compelling sincerity of tone and manner, such a climaxing peal from
      his brazen lungs, and such a lightning-vivid picture of his mailed form
      and flaunting banner when he burst out before that despairing army! And
      oh, the gentle art of the last half of his last sentence—delivered
      in the careless and indolent tone of one who has finished his real story,
      and only adds a colorless and inconsequential detail because it has
      happened to occur to him in a lazy way.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a marvel to see those innocent peasants. Why, they went all to
      pieces with enthusiasm, and roared out applauses fit to raise the roof and
      wake the dead. When they had cooled down at last and there was silence but
      for the heaving and panting, old Laxart said, admiringly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “As it seems to me, you are an army in your single person.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, that is what he is,” said Noel Rainguesson, convincingly. “He is a
      terror; and not just in this vicinity. His mere name carries a shudder
      with it to distant lands—just his mere name; and when he frowns, the
      shadow of it falls as far as Rome, and the chickens go to roost an hour
      before schedule time. Yes; and some say—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Noel Rainguesson, you are preparing yourself for trouble. I will say just
      one word to you, and it will be to your advantage to—”
     </p>
    <p>
      I saw that the usual thing had got a start. No man could prophesy when it
      would end. So I delivered Joan’s message and went off to bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan made her good-byes to those old fellows in the morning, with loving
      embraces and many tears, and with a packed multitude for sympathizers, and
      they rode proudly away on their precious horses to carry their great news
      home. I had seen better riders, some will say that; for horsemanship was a
      new art to them.
    </p>
    <p>
      The vanguard moved out at dawn and took the road, with bands braying and
      banners flying; the second division followed at eight. Then came the
      Burgundian ambassadors, and lost us the rest of that day and the whole of
      the next. But Joan was on hand, and so they had their journey for their
      pains. The rest of us took the road at dawn, next morning, July 20th. And
      got how far? Six leagues. Tremouille was getting in his sly work with the
      vacillating King, you see. The King stopped at St. Marcoul and prayed
      three days. Precious time lost—for us; precious time gained for
      Bedford. He would know how to use it.
    </p>
    <p>
      We could not go on without the King; that would be to leave him in the
      conspirators’ camp. Joan argued, reasoned, implored; and at last we got
      under way again.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s prediction was verified. It was not a campaign, it was only another
      holiday excursion. English strongholds lined our route; they surrendered
      without a blow; we garrisoned them with Frenchmen and passed on. Bedford
      was on the march against us with his new army by this time, and on the
      25th of July the hostile forces faced each other and made preparation for
      battle; but Bedford’s good judgment prevailed, and he turned and retreated
      toward Paris. Now was our chance. Our men were in great spirits.
    </p>
    <p>
      Will you believe it? Our poor stick of a King allowed his worthless
      advisers to persuade him to start back for Gien, whence he had set out
      when we first marched for Rheims and the Coronation! And we actually did
      start back. The fifteen-day truce had just been concluded with the Duke of
      Burgundy, and we would go and tarry at Gien until he should deliver Paris
      to us without a fight.
    </p>
    <p>
      We marched to Bray; then the King changed his mind once more, and with it
      his face toward Paris. Joan dictated a letter to the citizens of Rheims to
      encourage them to keep heart in spite of the truce, and promising to stand
      by them. She furnished them the news herself that the Kin had made this
      truce; and in speaking of it she was her usual frank self. She said she
      was not satisfied with it, and didn’t know whether she would keep it or
      not; that if she kept it, it would be solely out of tenderness for the
      King’s honor. All French children know those famous words. How naive they
      are! “De cette treve qui a ete faite, je ne suis pas contente, et je ne
      sais si je la tiendrai. Si je la tiens, ce sera seulement pour garder
      l’honneur du roi.” But in any case, she said, she would not allow the
      blood royal to be abused, and would keep the army in good order and ready
      for work at the end of the truce.
    </p>
    <p>
      Poor child, to have to fight England, Burgundy, and a French conspiracy
      all at the same time—it was too bad. She was a match for the others,
      but a conspiracy—ah, nobody is a match for that, when the victim
      that is to be injured is weak and willing. It grieved her, these troubled
      days, to be so hindered and delayed and baffled, and at times she was sad
      and the tears lay near the surface. Once, talking with her good old
      faithful friend and servant, the Bastard of Orleans, she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, if it might but please God to let me put off this steel raiment and
      go back to my father and my mother, and tend my sheep again with my sister
      and my brothers, who would be so glad to see me!”
     </p>
    <p>
      By the 12th of August we were camped near Dampmartin. Later we had a brush
      with Bedford’s rear-guard, and had hopes of a big battle on the morrow,
      but Bedford and all his force got away in the night and went on toward
      Paris.
    </p>
    <p>
      Charles sent heralds and received the submission of Beauvais. The Bishop
      Pierre Cauchon, that faithful friend and slave of the English, was not
      able to prevent it, though he did his best. He was obscure then, but his
      name was to travel round the globe presently, and live forever in the
      curses of France! Bear with me now, while I spit in fancy upon his grave.
    </p>
    <p>
      Compiegne surrendered, and hauled down the English flag. On the 14th we
      camped two leagues from Senlis. Bedford turned and approached, and took up
      a strong position. We went against him, but all our efforts to beguile him
      out from his intrenchments failed, though he had promised us a duel in the
      open field. Night shut down. Let him look out for the morning! But in the
      morning he was gone again.
    </p>
    <p>
      We entered Compiegne the 18th of August, turning out the English garrison
      and hoisting our own flag.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the 23d Joan gave command to move upon Paris. The King and the clique
      were not satisfied with this, and retired sulking to Senlis, which had
      just surrendered. Within a few days many strong places submitted—Creil,
      Pont-Saint-Maxence, Choisy, Gournay-sur-Aronde, Remy, Le Neufville-en-Hez,
      Moguay, Chantilly, Saintines. The English power was tumbling, crash after
      crash! And still the King sulked and disapproved, and was afraid of our
      movement against the capital.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the 26th of August, 1429, Joan camped at St. Denis; in effect, under
      the walls of Paris.
    </p>
    <p>
      And still the King hung back and was afraid. If we could but have had him
      there to back us with his authority! Bedford had lost heart and decided to
      waive resistance and go an concentrate his strength in the best and
      loyalest province remaining to him—Normandy. Ah, if we could only
      have persuaded the King to come and countenance us with his presence and
      approval at this supreme moment!
    </p>
    <h3>
      40 Treachery Conquers Joan
    </h3>
    <p>
      COURIER after courier was despatched to the King, and he promised to come,
      but didn’t. The Duke d’Alencon went to him and got his promise again,
      which he broke again. Nine days were lost thus; then he came, arriving at
      St. Denis September 7th.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meantime the enemy had begun to take heart: the spiritless conduct of the
      King could have no other result. Preparations had now been made to defend
      the city. Joan’s chances had been diminished, but she and her generals
      considered them plenty good enough yet. Joan ordered the attack for eight
      o’clock next morning, and at that hour it began.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan placed her artillery and began to pound a strong work which protected
      the gate St. Honor. When it was sufficiently crippled the assault was
      sounded at noon, and it was carried by storm. Then we moved forward to
      storm the gate itself, and hurled ourselves against it again and again,
      Joan in the lead with her standard at her side, the smoke enveloping us in
      choking clouds, and the missiles flying over us and through us as thick as
      hail.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the midst of our last assault, which would have carried the gate sure
      and given us Paris and in effect France, Joan was struck down by a
      crossbow bolt, and our men fell back instantly and almost in a panic—for
      what were they without her? She was the army, herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Although disabled, she refused to retire, and begged that a new assault be
      made, saying it must win; and adding, with the battle-light rising in her
      eyes, “I will take Paris now or die!” She had to be carried away by force,
      and this was done by Gaucourt and the Duke d’Alencon.
    </p>
    <p>
      But her spirits were at the very top notch, now. She was brimming with
      enthusiasm. She said she would be carried before the gate in the morning,
      and in half an hour Paris would be ours without any question. She could
      have kept her word. About this there was no doubt. But she forgot one
      factor—the King, shadow of that substance named La Tremouille. The
      King forbade the attempt!
    </p>
    <p>
      You see, a new Embassy had just come from the Duke of Burgundy, and
      another sham private trade of some sort was on foot.
    </p>
    <p>
      You would know, without my telling you, that Joan’s heart was nearly
      broken. Because of the pain of her wound and the pain at her heart she
      slept little that night. Several times the watchers heard muffled sobs
      from the dark room where she lay at St. Denis, and many times the grieving
      words, “It could have been taken!—it could have been taken!” which
      were the only ones she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      She dragged herself out of bed a day later with a new hope. D’Alencon had
      thrown a bridge across the Seine near St. Denis. Might she not cross by
      that and assault Paris at another point? But the King got wind of it and
      broke the bridge down! And more—he declared the campaign ended! And
      more still—he had made a new truce and a long one, in which he had
      agreed to leave Paris unthreatened and unmolested, and go back to the
      Loire whence he had come!
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan of Arc, who had never been defeated by the enemy, was defeated by her
      own King. She had said once that all she feared for her cause was
      treachery. It had struck its first blow now. She hung up her white armor
      in the royal basilica of St. Denis, and went and asked the King to relieve
      her of her functions and let her go home. As usual, she was wise. Grand
      combinations, far-reaching great military moves were at an end, now; for
      the future, when the truce should end, the war would be merely a war of
      random and idle skirmishes, apparently; work suitable for subalterns, and
      not requiring the supervision of a sublime military genius. But the King
      would not let her go. The truce did not embrace all France; there were
      French strongholds to be watched and preserved; he would need her. Really,
      you see, Tremouille wanted to keep her where he could balk and hinder her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now came her Voices again. They said, “Remain at St. Denis.” There was no
      explanation. They did not say why. That was the voice of God; it took
      precedence of the command of the King; Joan resolved to stay. But that
      filled La Tremouille with dread. She was too tremendous a force to be left
      to herself; she would surely defeat all his plans. He beguiled the King to
      use compulsion. Joan had to submit—because she was wounded and
      helpless. In the Great Trial she said she was carried away against her
      will; and that if she had not been wounded it could not have been
      accomplished. Ah, she had a spirit, that slender girl! a spirit to brave
      all earthly powers and defy them. We shall never know why the Voices
      ordered her to stay. We only know this; that if she could have obeyed, the
      history of France would not be as it now stands written in the books. Yes,
      well we know that.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the 13th of September the army, sad and spiritless, turned its face
      toward the Loire, and marched—without music! Yes, one noted that
      detail. It was a funeral march; that is what it was. A long, dreary
      funeral march, with never a shout or a cheer; friends looking on in tears,
      all the way, enemies laughing. We reached Gien at last—that place
      whence we had set out on our splendid march toward Rheims less than three
      months before, with flags flying, bands playing, the victory-flush of
      Patay glowing in our faces, and the massed multitudes shouting and
      praising and giving us godspeed. There was a dull rain falling now, the
      day was dark, the heavens mourned, the spectators were few, we had no
      welcome but the welcome of silence, and pity, and tears.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then the King disbanded that noble army of heroes; it furled its flags, it
      stored its arms: the disgrace of France was complete. La Tremouille wore
      the victor’s crown; Joan of Arc, the unconquerable, was conquered.
    </p>
    <h3>
      41 The Maid Will March No More
    </h3>
    <p>
      YES, IT was as I have said: Joan had Paris and France in her grip, and the
      Hundred Years’ War under her heel, and the King made her open her fist and
      take away her foot.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now followed about eight months of drifting about with the King and his
      council, and his gay and showy and dancing and flirting and hawking and
      frolicking and serenading and dissipating court—drifting from town
      to town and from castle to castle—a life which was pleasant to us of
      the personal staff, but not to Joan. However, she only saw it, she didn’t
      live it. The King did his sincerest best to make her happy, and showed a
      most kind and constant anxiety in this matter.
    </p>
    <p>
      All others had to go loaded with the chains of an exacting court
      etiquette, but she was free, she was privileged. So that she paid her duty
      to the King once a day and passed the pleasant word, nothing further was
      required of her. Naturally, then, she made herself a hermit, and grieved
      the weary days through in her own apartments, with her thoughts and
      devotions for company, and the planning of now forever unrealizable
      military combinations for entertainment. In fancy she moved bodies of men
      from this and that and the other point, so calculating the distances to be
      covered, the time required for each body, and the nature of the country to
      be traversed, as to have them appear in sight of each other on a given day
      or at a given hour and concentrate for battle. It was her only game, her
      only relief from her burden of sorrow and inaction. She played it hour
      after hour, as others play chess; and lost herself in it, and so got
      repose for her mind and healing for her heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      She never complained, of course. It was not her way. She was the sort that
      endure in silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      But—she was a caged eagle just the same, and pined for the free air
      and the alpine heights and the fierce joys of the storm.
    </p>
    <p>
      France was full of rovers—disbanded soldiers ready for anything that
      might turn up. Several times, at intervals, when Joan’s dull captivity
      grew too heavy to bear, she was allowed to gather a troop of cavalry and
      make a health-restoring dash against the enemy. These things were a bath
      to her spirits.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was like old times, there at Saint-Pierre-le-Moutier, to see her lead
      assault after assault, be driven back again and again, but always rally
      and charge anew, all in a blaze of eagerness and delight; till at last the
      tempest of missiles rained so intolerably thick that old D’Aulon, who was
      wounded, sounded the retreat (for the King had charged him on his head to
      let no harm come to Joan); and away everybody rushed after him—as he
      supposed; but when he turned and looked, there were we of the staff still
      hammering away; wherefore he rode back and urged her to come, saying she
      was mad to stay there with only a dozen men. Her eye danced merrily, and
      she turned upon him crying out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “A dozen men! name of God, I have fifty-thousand, and will never budge
      till this place is taken!
    </p>
    <p>
      “Sound the charge!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Which he did, and over the walls we went, and the fortress was ours. Old
      D’Aulon thought her mind was wandering; but all she meant was, that she
      felt the might of fifty thousand men surging in her heart. It was a
      fanciful expression; but, to my thinking, truer word was never said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then there was the affair near Lagny, where we charged the intrenched
      Burgundians through the open field four times, the last time victoriously;
      the best prize of it Franquet d’Arras, the free-booter and pitiless
      scourge of the region roundabout.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now and then other such affairs; and at last, away toward the end of May,
      1430, we were in the neighborhood of Compiegne, and Joan resolved to go to
      the help of that place, which was being besieged by the Duke of Burgundy.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had been wounded lately, and was not able to ride without help; but the
      good Dwarf took me on behind him, and I held on to him and was safe
      enough. We started at midnight, in a sullen downpour of warm rain, and
      went slowly and softly and in dead silence, for we had to slip through the
      enemy’s lines. We were challenged only once; we made no answer, but held
      our breath and crept steadily and stealthily along, and got through
      without any accident. About three or half past we reached Compiegne, just
      as the gray dawn was breaking in the east.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan set to work at once, and concerted a plan with Guillaume de Flavy,
      captain of the city—a plan for a sortie toward evening against the
      enemy, who was posted in three bodies on the other side of the Oise, in
      the level plain. From our side one of the city gates communicated with a
      bridge. The end of this bridge was defended on the other side of the river
      by one of those fortresses called a boulevard; and this boulevard also
      commanded a raised road, which stretched from its front across the plain
      to the village of Marguy. A force of Burgundians occupied Marguy; another
      was camped at Clairoix, a couple of miles above the raised road; and a
      body of English was holding Venette, a mile and a half below it. A kind of
      bow-and-arrow arrangement, you see; the causeway the arrow, the boulevard
      at the feather-end of it, Marguy at the barb, Venette at one end of the
      bow, Clairoix at the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s plan was to go straight per causeway against Marguy, carry it by
      assault, then turn swiftly upon Clairoix, up to the right, and capture
      that camp in the same way, then face to the rear and be ready for heavy
      work, for the Duke of Burgundy lay behind Clairoix with a reserve. Flavy’s
      lieutenant, with archers and the artillery of the boulevard, was to keep
      the English troops from coming up from below and seizing the causeway and
      cutting off Joan’s retreat in case she should have to make one. Also, a
      fleet of covered boats was to be stationed near the boulevard as an
      additional help in case a retreat should become necessary.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was the 24th of May. At four in the afternoon Joan moved out at the
      head of six hundred cavalry—on her last march in this life!
    </p>
    <p>
      It breaks my heart. I had got myself helped up onto the walls, and from
      there I saw much that happened, the rest was told me long afterward by our
      two knights and other eye-witnesses. Joan crossed the bridge, and soon
      left the boulevard behind her and went skimming away over the raised road
      with her horsemen clattering at her heels. She had on a brilliant
      silver-gilt cape over her armor, and I could see it flap and flare and
      rise and fall like a little patch of white flame.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a bright day, and one could see far and wide over that plain. Soon
      we saw the English force advancing, swiftly and in handsome order, the
      sunlight flashing from its arms.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan crashed into the Burgundians at Marguy and was repulsed. Then she saw
      the other Burgundians moving down from Clairoix. Joan rallied her men and
      charged again, and was again rolled back. Two assaults occupy a good deal
      of time—and time was precious here. The English were approaching the
      road now from Venette, but the boulevard opened fire on them and they were
      checked. Joan heartened her men with inspiring words and led them to the
      charge again in great style. This time she carried Marguy with a hurrah.
      Then she turned at once to the right and plunged into the plan and struck
      the Clairoix force, which was just arriving; then there was heavy work,
      and plenty of it, the two armies hurling each other backward turn about
      and about, and victory inclining first to the one, then to the other. Now
      all of a sudden there was a panic on our side. Some say one thing caused
      it, some another. Some say the cannonade made our front ranks think
      retreat was being cut off by the English, some say the rear ranks got the
      idea that Joan was killed. Anyway our men broke, and went flying in a wild
      rout for the causeway. Joan tried to rally them and face them around,
      crying to them that victory was sure, but it did no good, they divided and
      swept by her like a wave. Old D’Aulon begged her to retreat while there
      was yet a chance for safety, but she refused; so he seized her horse’s
      bridle and bore her along with the wreck and ruin in spite of herself. And
      so along the causeway they came swarming, that wild confusion of frenzied
      men and horses—and the artillery had to stop firing, of course;
      consequently the English and Burgundians closed in in safety, the former
      in front, the latter behind their prey. Clear to the boulevard the French
      were washed in this enveloping inundation; and there, cornered in an angle
      formed by the flank of the boulevard and the slope of the causeway, they
      bravely fought a hopeless fight, and sank down one by one.
    </p>
    <p>
      Flavy, watching from the city wall, ordered the gate to be closed and the
      drawbridge raised. This shut Joan out.
    </p>
    <p>
      The little personal guard around her thinned swiftly. Both of our good
      knights went down disabled; Joan’s two brothers fell wounded; then Noel
      Rainguesson—all wounded while loyally sheltering Joan from blows
      aimed at her. When only the Dwarf and the Paladin were left, they would
      not give up, but stood their ground stoutly, a pair of steel towers
      streaked and splashed with blood; and where the ax of one fell, and the
      sword of the other, an enemy gasped and died.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so fighting, and loyal to their duty to the last, good simple souls,
      they came to their honorable end. Peace to their memories! they were very
      dear to me.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then there was a cheer and a rush, and Joan, still defiant, still laying
      about her with her sword, was seized by her cape and dragged from her
      horse. She was borne away a prisoner to the Duke of Burgundy’s camp, and
      after her followed the victorious army roaring its joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      The awful news started instantly on its round; from lip to lip it flew;
      and wherever it came it struck the people as with a sort of paralysis; and
      they murmured over and over again, as if they were talking to themselves,
      or in their sleep, “The Maid of Orleans taken!... Joan of Arc a
      prisoner!... the savior of France lost to us!”—and would keep saying
      that over, as if they couldn’t understand how it could be, or how God
      could permit it, poor creatures!
    </p>
    <p>
      You know what a city is like when it is hung from eaves to pavement with
      rustling black? Then you know what Rouse was like, and some other cities.
      But can any man tell you what the mourning in the hearts of the peasantry
      of France was like? No, nobody can tell you that, and, poor dumb things,
      they could not have told you themselves, but it was there—indeed,
      yes. Why, it was the spirit of a whole nation hung with crape!
    </p>
    <p>
      The 24th of May. We will draw down the curtain now upon the most strange,
      and pathetic, and wonderful military drama that has been played upon the
      stage of the world. Joan of Arc will march no more.
    </p>
    <h2>
      BOOK III TRIAL AND MARTYRDOM
    </h2>
    <h3>
      1 The Maid in Chains
    </h3>
    <p>
      I CANNOT bear to dwell at great length upon the shameful history of the
      summer and winter following the capture. For a while I was not much
      troubled, for I was expecting every day to hear that Joan had been put to
      ransom, and that the King—no, not the King, but grateful France—had
      come eagerly forward to pay it. By the laws of war she could not be denied
      the privilege of ransom. She was not a rebel; she was a legitimately
      constituted soldier, head of the armies of France by her King’s
      appointment, and guilty of no crime known to military law; therefore she
      could not be detained upon any pretext, if ransom were proffered.
    </p>
    <p>
      But day after day dragged by and no ransom was offered! It seems
      incredible, but it is true. Was that reptile Tremouille busy at the King’s
      ear? All we know is, that the King was silent, and made no offer and no
      effort in behalf of this poor girl who had done so much for him.
    </p>
    <p>
      But, unhappily, there was alacrity enough in another quarter. The news of
      the capture reached Paris the day after it happened, and the glad English
      and Burgundians deafened the world all the day and all the night with the
      clamor of their joy-bells and the thankful thunder of their artillery, and
      the next day the Vicar-General of the Inquisition sent a message to the
      Duke of Burgundy requiring the delivery of the prisoner into the hands of
      the Church to be tried as an idolater.
    </p>
    <p>
      The English had seen their opportunity, and it was the English power that
      was really acting, not the Church. The Church was being used as a blind, a
      disguise; and for a forcible reason: the Church was not only able to take
      the life of Joan of Arc, but to blight her influence and the
      valor-breeding inspiration of her name, whereas the English power could
      but kill her body; that would not diminish or destroy the influence of her
      name; it would magnify it and make it permanent. Joan of Arc was the only
      power in France that the English did not despise, the only power in France
      that they considered formidable. If the Church could be brought to take
      her life, or to proclaim her an idolater, a heretic, a witch, sent from
      Satan, not from heaven, it was believed that the English supremacy could
      be at once reinstated.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Duke of Burgundy listened—but waited. He could not doubt that
      the French King or the French people would come forward presently and pay
      a higher price than the English. He kept Joan a close prisoner in a strong
      fortress, and continued to wait, week after week. He was a French prince,
      and was at heart ashamed to sell her to the English. Yet with all his
      waiting no offer came to him from the French side.
    </p>
    <p>
      One day Joan played a cunning trick on her jailer, and not only slipped
      out of her prison, but locked him up in it. But as she fled away she was
      seen by a sentinel, and was caught and brought back.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then she was sent to Beaurevoir, a stronger castle. This was early in
      August, and she had been in captivity more than two months now. Here she
      was shut up in the top of a tower which was sixty feet high. She ate her
      heart there for another long stretch—about three months and a half.
      And she was aware, all these weary five months of captivity, that the
      English, under cover of the Church, were dickering for her as one would
      dicker for a horse or a slave, and that France was silent, the King
      silent, all her friends the same. Yes, it was pitiful.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet when she heard at last that Compiegne was being closely besieged
      and likely to be captured, and that the enemy had declared that no
      inhabitant of it should escape massacre, not even children of seven years
      of age, she was in a fever at once to fly to our rescue. So she tore her
      bedclothes to strips and tied them together and descended this frail rope
      in the night, and it broke, and she fell and was badly bruised, and
      remained three days insensible, meantime neither eating nor drinking.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now came relief to us, led by the Count of Vendome, and Compiegne was
      saved and the siege raised. This was a disaster to the Duke of Burgundy.
      He had to save money now. It was a good time for a new bid to be made for
      Joan of Arc. The English at once sent a French bishop—that forever
      infamous Pierre Cauchon of Beauvais. He was partly promised the
      Archbishopric of Rouen, which was vacant, if he should succeed. He claimed
      the right to preside over Joan’s ecclesiastical trial because the
      battle-ground where she was taken was within his diocese. By the military
      usage of the time the ransom of a royal prince was 10,000 livres of gold,
      which is 61,125 francs—a fixed sum, you see. It must be accepted
      when offered; it could not be refused.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon brought the offer of this very sum from the English—a royal
      prince’s ransom for the poor little peasant-girl of Domremy. It shows in a
      striking way the English idea of her formidable importance. It was
      accepted. For that sum Joan of Arc, the Savior of France, was sold; sold
      to her enemies; to the enemies of her country; enemies who had lashed and
      thrashed and thumped and trounced France for a century and made holiday
      sport of it; enemies who had forgotten, years and years ago, what a
      Frenchman’s face was like, so used were they to seeing nothing but his
      back; enemies whom she had whipped, whom she had cowed, whom she had
      taught to respect French valor, new-born in her nation by the breath of
      her spirit; enemies who hungered for her life as being the only puissance
      able to stand between English triumph and French degradation. Sold to a
      French priest by a French prince, with the French King and the French
      nation standing thankless by and saying nothing.
    </p>
    <p>
      And she—what did she say? Nothing. Not a reproach passed her lips.
      She was too great for that—she was Joan of Arc; and when that is
      said, all is said.
    </p>
    <p>
      As a soldier, her record was spotless. She could not be called to account
      for anything under that head. A subterfuge must be found, and, as we have
      seen, was found. She must be tried by priests for crimes against religion.
      If none could be discovered, some must be invented. Let the miscreant
      Cauchon alone to contrive those.
    </p>
    <p>
      Rouen was chosen as the scene of the trial. It was in the heart of the
      English power; its population had been under English dominion so many
      generations that they were hardly French now, save in language. The place
      was strongly garrisoned. Joan was taken there near the end of December,
      1430, and flung into a dungeon. Yes, and clothed in chains, that free
      spirit!
    </p>
    <p>
      Still France made no move. How do I account for this? I think there is
      only one way. You will remember that whenever Joan was not at the front,
      the French held back and ventured nothing; that whenever she led, they
      swept everything before them, so long as they could see her white armor or
      her banner; that every time she fell wounded or was reported killed—as
      at Compiegne—they broke in panic and fled like sheep. I argue from
      this that they had undergone no real transformation as yet; that at bottom
      they were still under the spell of a timorousness born of generations of
      unsuccess, and a lack of confidence in each other and in their leaders
      born of old and bitter experience in the way of treacheries of all sorts—for
      their kings had been treacherous to their great vassals and to their
      generals, and these in turn were treacherous to the head of the state and
      to each other. The soldiery found that they could depend utterly on Joan,
      and upon her alone. With her gone, everything was gone. She was the sun
      that melted the frozen torrents and set them boiling; with that sun
      removed, they froze again, and the army and all France became what they
      had been before, mere dead corpses—that and nothing more; incapable
      of thought, hope, ambition, or motion.
    </p>
    <h3>
      2 Joan Sold to the English
    </h3>
    <p>
      MY WOUND gave me a great deal of trouble clear into the first part of
      October; then the fresher weather renewed my life and strength. All this
      time there were reports drifting about that the King was going to ransom
      Joan. I believed these, for I was young and had not yet found out the
      littleness and meanness of our poor human race, which brags about itself
      so much, and thinks it is better and higher than the other animals.
    </p>
    <p>
      In October I was well enough to go out with two sorties, and in the second
      one, on the 23d, I was wounded again. My luck had turned, you see. On the
      night of the 25th the besiegers decamped, and in the disorder and
      confusion one of their prisoners escaped and got safe into Compiegne, and
      hobbled into my room as pallid and pathetic an object as you would wish to
      see.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What? Alive? Noel Rainguesson!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was indeed he. It was a most joyful meeting, that you will easily know;
      and also as sad as it was joyful. We could not speak Joan’s name. One’s
      voice would have broken down. We knew who was meant when she was
      mentioned; we could say “she” and “her,” but we could not speak the name.
    </p>
    <p>
      We talked of the personal staff. Old D’Aulon, wounded and a prisoner, was
      still with Joan and serving her, by permission of the Duke of Burgundy.
      Joan was being treated with respect due to her rank and to her character
      as a prisoner of war taken in honorable conflict. And this was continued—as
      we learned later—until she fell into the hands of that bastard of
      Satan, Pierre Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais.
    </p>
    <p>
      Noel was full of noble and affectionate praises and appreciations of our
      old boastful big Standard-Bearer, now gone silent forever, his real and
      imaginary battles all fought, his work done, his life honorably closed and
      completed.
    </p>
    <p>
      “And think of his luck!” burst out Noel, with his eyes full of tears.
      “Always the pet child of luck!
    </p>
    <p>
      “See how it followed him and stayed by him, from his first step all
      through, in the field or out of it; always a splendid figure in the public
      eye, courted and envied everywhere; always having a chance to do fine
      things and always doing them; in the beginning called the Paladin in joke,
      and called it afterward in earnest because he magnificently made the title
      good; and at last—supremest luck of all—died in the field!
      died with his harness on; died faithful to his charge, the Standard in his
      hand; died—oh, think of it—with the approving eye of Joan of
      Arc upon him!
    </p>
    <p>
      “He drained the cup of glory to the last drop, and went jubilant to his
      peace, blessedly spared all part in the disaster which was to follow. What
      luck, what luck! And we? What was our sin that we are still here, we who
      have also earned our place with the happy dead?”
     </p>
    <p>
      And presently he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “They tore the sacred Standard from his dead hand and carried it away,
      their most precious prize after its captured owner. But they haven’t it
      now. A month ago we put our lives upon the risk—our two good
      knights, my fellow-prisoners, and I—and stole it, and got it
      smuggled by trusty hands to Orleans, and there it is now, safe for all
      time in the Treasury.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was glad and grateful to learn that. I have seen it often since, when I
      have gone to Orleans on the 8th of May to be the petted old guest of the
      city and hold the first place of honor at the banquets and in the
      processions—I mean since Joan’s brothers passed from this life. It
      will still be there, sacredly guarded by French love, a thousand years
      from now—yes, as long as any shred of it hangs together. (1) Two or
      three weeks after this talk came the tremendous news like a thunder-clap,
      and we were aghast—Joan of Arc sold to the English!
    </p>
    <p>
      Not for a moment had we ever dreamed of such a thing. We were young, you
      see, and did not know the human race, as I have said before. We had been
      so proud of our country, so sure of her nobleness, her magnanimity, her
      gratitude. We had expected little of the King, but of France we had
      expected everything. Everybody knew that in various towns patriot priests
      had been marching in procession urging the people to sacrifice money,
      property, everything, and buy the freedom of their heaven-sent deliverer.
      That the money would be raised we had not thought of doubting.
    </p>
    <p>
      But it was all over now, all over. It was a bitter time for us. The
      heavens seemed hung with black; all cheer went out from our hearts. Was
      this comrade here at my bedside really Noel Rainguesson, that
      light-hearted creature whose whole life was but one long joke, and who
      used up more breath in laughter than in keeping his body alive? No, no;
      that Noel I was to see no more. This one’s heart was broken. He moved
      grieving about, and absently, like one in a dream; the stream of his
      laughter was dried at its source.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, that was best. It was my own mood. We were company for each other.
      He nursed me patiently through the dull long weeks, and at last, in
      January, I was strong enough to go about again. Then he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Shall we go now?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was no need to explain. Our hearts were in Rouen; we would carry our
      bodies there. All that we cared for in this life was shut up in that
      fortress. We could not help her, but it would be some solace to us to be
      near her, to breathe the air that she breathed, and look daily upon the
      stone walls that hid her. What if we should be made prisoners there? Well,
      we could but do our best, and let luck and fate decide what should happen.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so we started. We could not realize the change which had come upon the
      country. We seemed able to choose our own route and go whenever we
      pleased, unchallenged and unmolested. When Joan of Arc was in the field
      there was a sort of panic of fear everywhere; but now that she was out of
      the way, fear had vanished. Nobody was troubled about you or afraid of
      you, nobody was curious about you or your business, everybody was
      indifferent.
    </p>
    <p>
      We presently saw that we could take to the Seine, and not weary ourselves
      out with land travel.
    </p>
    <p>
      So we did it, and were carried in a boat to within a league of Rouen. Then
      we got ashore; not on the hilly side, but on the other, where it is as
      level as a floor. Nobody could enter or leave the city without explaining
      himself. It was because they feared attempts at a rescue of Joan.
    </p>
    <p>
      We had no trouble. We stopped in the plain with a family of peasants and
      stayed a week, helping them with their work for board and lodging, and
      making friends of them. We got clothes like theirs, and wore them. When we
      had worked our way through their reserves and gotten their confidence, we
      found that they secretly harbored French hearts in their bodies. Then we
      came out frankly and told them everything, and found them ready to do
      anything they could to help us.
    </p>
    <p>
      Our plan was soon made, and was quite simple. It was to help them drive a
      flock of sheep to the market of the city. One morning early we made the
      venture in a melancholy drizzle of rain, and passed through the frowning
      gates unmolested. Our friends had friends living over a humble wine shop
      in a quaint tall building situated in one of the narrow lanes that run
      down from the cathedral to the river, and with these they bestowed us; and
      the next day they smuggled our own proper clothing and other belongings to
      us. The family that lodged us—the Pieroons—were French in
      sympathy, and we needed to have no secrets from them.
    </p>
    <p>
      (1) It remained there three hundred and sixty years, and then was
      destroyed in a public bonfire, together with two swords, a plumed cap,
      several suits of state apparel, and other relics of the Maid, by a mob in
      the time of the Revolution. Nothing which the hand of Joan of Arc is known
      to have touched now remains in existence except a few preciously guarded
      military and state papers which she signed, her pen being guided by a
      clerk or her secretary, Louis de Conte. A boulder exists from which she is
      known to have mounted her horse when she was once setting out upon a
      campaign. Up to a quarter of a century ago there was a single hair from
      her head still in existence. It was drawn through the wax of a seal
      attached to the parchment of a state document. It was surreptitiously
      snipped out, seal and all, by some vandal relic-hunter, and carried off.
      Doubtless it still exists, but only the thief knows where. —
      TRANSLATOR.
    </p>
    <h3>
      3 Weaving the Net About Her
    </h3>
    <p>
      IT WAS necessary for me to have some way to gain bread for Noel and
      myself; and when the Pierrons found that I knew how to write, the applied
      to their confessor in my behalf, and he got a place for me with a good
      priest named Manchon, who was to be the chief recorder in the Great Trial
      of Joan of Arc now approaching. It was a strange position for me—clerk
      to the recorder—and dangerous if my sympathies and the late
      employment should be found out. But there was not much danger. Manchon was
      at bottom friendly to Joan and would not betray me; and my name would not,
      for I had discarded my surname and retained only my given one, like a
      person of low degree.
    </p>
    <p>
      I attended Manchon constantly straight along, out of January and into
      February, and was often in the citadel with him—in the very fortress
      where Joan was imprisoned, though not in the dungeon where she was
      confined, and so did not see her, of course.
    </p>
    <p>
      Manchon told me everything that had been happening before my coming. Ever
      since the purchase of Joan, Cauchon had been busy packing his jury for the
      destruction of the Maid—weeks and weeks he had spent in this bad
      industry. The University of Paris had sent him a number of learned and
      able and trusty ecclesiastics of the stripe he wanted; and he had scraped
      together a clergyman of like stripe and great fame here and there and
      yonder, until he was able to construct a formidable court numbering half a
      hundred distinguished names. French names they were, but their interests
      and sympathies were English.
    </p>
    <p>
      A great officer of the Inquisition was also sent from Paris for the
      accused must be tried by the forms of the Inquisition; but this was a
      brave and righteous man, and he said squarely that this court had no power
      to try the case, wherefore he refused to act; and the same honest talk was
      uttered by two or three others.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Inquisitor was right. The case as here resurrected against Joan had
      already been tried long ago at Poitiers, and decided in her favor. Yes,
      and by a higher tribunal than this one, for at the head of it was an
      Archbishop—he of Rheims—Cauchon’s own metropolitan. So here,
      you see, a lower court was impudently preparing to try and redecide a
      cause which had already been decided by its superior, a court of higher
      authority. Imagine it! No, the case could not properly be tried again.
      Cauchon could not properly preside in this new court, for more than one
      reason:
    </p>
    <p>
      Rouen was not in his diocese; Joan had not been arrested in her domicile,
      which was still Domremy; and finally this proposed judge was the
      prisoner’s outspoken enemy, and therefore he was incompetent to try her.
      Yet all these large difficulties were gotten rid of. The territorial
      Chapter of Rouen finally granted territorial letters to Cauchon—though
      only after a struggle and under compulsion. Force was also applied to the
      Inquisitor, and he was obliged to submit.
    </p>
    <p>
      So then, the little English King, by his representative, formally
      delivered Joan into the hands of the court, but with this reservation: if
      the court failed to condemn her, he was to have her back again! Ah, dear,
      what chance was there for that forsaken and friendless child? Friendless,
      indeed—it is the right word. For she was in a black dungeon, with
      half a dozen brutal common soldiers keeping guard night and day in the
      room where her cage was—for she was in a cage; an iron cage, and
      chained to her bed by neck and hands and feet. Never a person near her
      whom she had ever seen before; never a woman at all. Yes, this was,
      indeed, friendlessness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now it was a vassal of Jean de Luxembourg who captured Joan and Compiegne,
      and it was Jean who sold her to the Duke of Burgundy. Yet this very De
      Luxembourg was shameless enough to go and show his face to Joan in her
      cage. He came with two English earls, Warwick and Stafford. He was a poor
      reptile. He told her he would get her set free if she would promise not to
      fight the English any more. She had been in that cage a long time now, but
      not long enough to break her spirit. She retorted scornfully:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Name of God, you but mock me. I know that you have neither the power nor
      the will to do it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He insisted. Then the pride and dignity of the soldier rose in Joan, and
      she lifted her chained hands and let them fall with a clash, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “See these! They know more than you, and can prophesy better. I know that
      the English are going to kill me, for they think that when I am dead they
      can get the Kingdom of France. It is not so.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Though there were a hundred thousand of them they would never get it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      This defiance infuriated Stafford, and he—now think of it—he a
      free, strong man, she a chained and helpless girl—he drew his dagger
      and flung himself at her to stab her. But Warwick seized him and held him
      back. Warwick was wise. Take her life in that way? Send her to Heaven
      stainless and undisgraced? It would make her the idol of France, and the
      whole nation would rise and march to victory and emancipation under the
      inspiration of her spirit. No, she must be saved for another fate than
      that.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, the time was approaching for the Great Trial. For more than two
      months Cauchon had been raking and scraping everywhere for any odds and
      ends of evidence or suspicion or conjecture that might be usable against
      Joan, and carefully suppressing all evidence that came to hand in her
      favor. He had limitless ways and means and powers at his disposal for
      preparing and strengthening the case for the prosecution, and he used them
      all.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Joan had no one to prepare her case for her, and she was shut up in
      those stone walls and had no friend to appeal to for help. And as for
      witnesses, she could not call a single one in her defense; they were all
      far away, under the French flag, and this was an English court; they would
      have been seized and hanged if they had shown their faces at the gates of
      Rouen. No, the prisoner must be the sole witness—witness for the
      prosecution, witness for the defense; and with a verdict of death resolved
      upon before the doors were opened for the court’s first sitting.
    </p>
    <p>
      When she learned that the court was made up of ecclesiastics in the
      interest of the English, she begged that in fairness an equal number of
      priests of the French party should be added to these.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon scoffed at her message, and would not even deign to answer it.
    </p>
    <p>
      By the law of the Church—she being a minor under twenty-one—it
      was her right to have counsel to conduct her case, advise her how to
      answer when questioned, and protect her from falling into traps set by
      cunning devices of the prosecution. She probably did not know that this
      was her right, and that she could demand it and require it, for there was
      none to tell her that; but she begged for this help, at any rate. Cauchon
      refused it. She urged and implored, pleading her youth and her ignorance
      of the complexities and intricacies of the law and of legal procedure.
      Cauchon refused again, and said she must get along with her case as best
      she might by herself. Ah, his heart was a stone.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon prepared the proces verbal. I will simplify that by calling it the
      Bill of Particulars. It was a detailed list of the charges against her,
      and formed the basis of the trial. Charges? It was a list of suspicions
      and public rumors—those were the words used. It was merely charged
      that she was suspected of having been guilty of heresies, witchcraft, and
      other such offenses against religion.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now by the law of the Church, a trial of that sort could not be begun
      until a searching inquiry had been made into the history and character of
      the accused, and it was essential that the result of this inquiry be added
      to the proces verbal and form a part of it. You remember that that was the
      first thing they did before the trial at Poitiers. They did it again now.
      An ecclesiastic was sent to Domremy. There and all about the neighborhood
      he made an exhaustive search into Joan’s history and character, and came
      back with his verdict. It was very clear. The searcher reported that he
      found Joan’s character to be in every way what he “would like his own
      sister’s character to be.” Just about the same report that was brought
      back to Poitiers, you see. Joan’s was a character which could endure the
      minutest examination.
    </p>
    <p>
      This verdict was a strong point for Joan, you will say. Yes, it would have
      been if it could have seen the light; but Cauchon was awake, and it
      disappeared from the proces verbal before the trial. People were prudent
      enough not to inquire what became of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      One would imagine that Cauchon was ready to begin the trial by this time.
      But no, he devised one more scheme for poor Joan’s destruction, and it
      promised to be a deadly one.
    </p>
    <p>
      One of the great personages picked out and sent down by the University of
      Paris was an ecclesiastic named Nicolas Loyseleur. He was tall, handsome,
      grave, of smooth, soft speech and courteous and winning manners. There was
      no seeming of treachery or hypocrisy about him, yet he was full of both.
      He was admitted to Joan’s prison by night, disguised as a cobbler; he
      pretended to be from her own country; he professed to be secretly a
      patriot; he revealed the fact that he was a priest. She was filled with
      gladness to see one from the hills and plains that were so dear to her;
      happier still to look upon a priest and disburden her heart in confession,
      for the offices of the Church were the bread of life, the breath of her
      nostrils to her, and she had been long forced to pine for them in vain.
      She opened her whole innocent heart to this creature, and in return he
      gave her advice concerning her trial which could have destroyed her if her
      deep native wisdom had not protected her against following it.
    </p>
    <p>
      You will ask, what value could this scheme have, since the secrets of the
      confessional are sacred and cannot be revealed? True—but suppose
      another person should overhear them? That person is not bound to keep the
      secret. Well, that is what happened. Cauchon had previously caused a hole
      to be bored through the wall; and he stood with his ear to that hole and
      heard all. It is pitiful to think of these things. One wonders how they
      could treat that poor child so. She had not done them any harm.
    </p>
    <h3>
      4 All Ready to Condemn
    </h3>

    <p>
      ON TUESDAY, the 20th of February, while I sat at my master’s work in the
      evening, he came in, looking sad, and said it had been decided to begin
      the trial at eight o’clock the next morning, and I must get ready to
      assist him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of course I had been expecting such news every day for many days; but no
      matter, the shock of it almost took my breath away and set me trembling
      like a leaf. I suppose that without knowing it I had been half imagining
      that at the last moment something would happen, something that would stop
      this fatal trial; maybe that La Hire would burst in at the gates with his
      hellions at his back; maybe that God would have pity and stretch forth His
      mighty hand. But now—now there was no hope.
    </p>
    <p>
      The trial was to begin in the chapel of the fortress and would be public.
      So I went sorrowing away and told Noel, so that he might be there early
      and secure a place. It would give him a chance to look again upon the face
      which we so revered and which was so precious to us. All the way, both
      going and coming, I plowed through chattering and rejoicing multitudes of
      English soldiery and English-hearted French citizens. There was no talk
      but of the coming event. Many times I heard the remark, accompanied by a
      pitiless laugh:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The fat Bishop has got things as he wants them at last, and says he will
      lead the vile witch a merry dance and a short one.”
     </p>
    <p>
      But here and there I glimpsed compassion and distress in a face, and it
      was not always a French one. English soldiers feared Joan, but they
      admired her for her great deeds and her unconquerable spirit.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the morning Manchon and I went early, yet as we approached the vast
      fortress we found crowds of men already there and still others gathering.
      The chapel was already full and the way barred against further admissions
      of unofficial persons. We took our appointed places. Throned on high sat
      the president, Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais, in his grand robes, and before
      him in rows sat his robed court—fifty distinguished ecclesiastics,
      men of high degree in the Church, of clear-cut intellectual faces, men of
      deep learning, veteran adepts in strategy and casuistry, practised setters
      of traps for ignorant minds and unwary feet. When I looked around upon
      this army of masters of legal fence, gathered here to find just one
      verdict and no other, and remembered that Joan must fight for her good
      name and her life single-handed against them, I asked myself what chance
      an ignorant poor country-girl of nineteen could have in such an unequal
      conflict; and my heart sank down low, very low. When I looked again at
      that obese president, puffing and wheezing there, his great belly
      distending and receding with each breath, and noted his three chins, fold
      above fold, and his knobby and knotty face, and his purple and splotchy
      complexion, and his repulsive cauliflower nose, and his cold and malignant
      eyes—a brute, every detail of him—my heart sank lower still.
      And when I noted that all were afraid of this man, and shrank and fidgeted
      in their seats when his eye smote theirs, my last poor ray of hope
      dissolved away and wholly disappeared.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was one unoccupied seat in this place, and only one. It was over
      against the wall, in view of every one. It was a little wooden bench
      without a back, and it stood apart and solitary on a sort of dais. Tall
      men-at-arms in morion, breastplate, and steel gauntlets stood as stiff as
      their own halberds on each side of this dais, but no other creature was
      near by it. A pathetic little bench to me it was, for I knew whom it was
      for; and the sight of it carried my mind back to the great court at
      Poitiers, where Joan sat upon one like it and calmly fought her cunning
      fight with the astonished doctors of the Church and Parliament, and rose
      from it victorious and applauded by all, and went forth to fill the world
      with the glory of her name.
    </p>
    <p>
      What a dainty little figure she was, and how gentle and innocent, how
      winning and beautiful in the fresh bloom of her seventeen years! Those
      were grand days. And so recent—for she was just nineteen now—and
      how much she had seen since, and what wonders she had accomplished!
    </p>
    <p>
      But now—oh, all was changed now. She had been languishing in
      dungeons, away from light and air and the cheer of friendly faces, for
      nearly three-quarters of a year—she, born child of the sun, natural
      comrade of the birds and of all happy free creatures. She would be weary
      now, and worn with this long captivity, her forces impaired; despondent,
      perhaps, as knowing there was no hope. Yes, all was changed.
    </p>
    <p>
      All this time there had been a muffled hum of conversation, and rustling
      of robes and scraping of feet on the floor, a combination of dull noises
      which filled all the place. Suddenly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Produce the accused!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made me catch my breath. My heart began to thump like a hammer. But
      there was silence now—silence absolute. All those noises ceased, and
      it was as if they had never been. Not a sound; the stillness grew
      oppressive; it was like a weight upon one. All faces were turned toward
      the door; and one could properly expect that, for most of the people there
      suddenly realized, no doubt, that they were about to see, in actual flesh
      and blood, what had been to them before only an embodied prodigy, a word,
      a phrase, a world-girdling Name.
    </p>
    <p>
      The stillness continued. Then, far down the stone-paved corridors, one
      heard a vague slow sound approaching: clank... clink... clank—Joan
      of Arc, Deliverer of France, in chains!
    </p>
    <p>
      My head swam; all things whirled and spun about me. Ah, I was realizing,
      too.
    </p>
    <h3>
      5 Fifty Experts Against a Novice
    </h3>
    <p>
      I GIVE you my honor now that I am not going to distort or discolor the
      facts of this miserable trial. No, I will give them to you honestly,
      detail by detail, just as Manchon and I set them down daily in the
      official record of the court, and just as one may read them in the printed
      histories.
    </p>
    <p>
      There will be only this difference: that in talking familiarly with you, I
      shall use my right to comment upon the proceedings and explain them as I
      go along, so that you can understand them better; also, I shall throw in
      trifles which came under our eyes and have a certain interest for you and
      me, but were not important enough to go into the official record. (1) To
      take up my story now where I left off. We heard the clanking of Joan’s
      chains down the corridors; she was approaching.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently she appeared; a thrill swept the house, and one heard deep
      breaths drawn. Two guardsmen followed her at a short distance to the rear.
      Her head was bowed a little, and she moved slowly, she being weak and her
      irons heavy. She had on men’s attire—all black; a soft woolen stuff,
      intensely black, funereally black, not a speck of relieving color in it
      from her throat to the floor. A wide collar of this same black stuff lay
      in radiating folds upon her shoulders and breast; the sleeves of her
      doublet were full, down to the elbows, and tight thence to her manacled
      wrists; below the doublet, tight black hose down to the chains on her
      ankles.
    </p>
    <p>
      Half-way to her bench she stopped, just where a wide shaft of light fell
      slanting from a window, and slowly lifted her face. Another thrill!—it
      was totally colorless, white as snow; a face of gleaming snow set in vivid
      contrast upon that slender statue of somber unmitigated black. It was
      smooth and pure and girlish, beautiful beyond belief, infinitely sad and
      sweet. But, dear, dear! when the challenge of those untamed eyes fell upon
      that judge, and the droop vanished from her form and it straightened up
      soldierly and noble, my heart leaped for joy; and I said, all is well, all
      is well—they have not broken her, they have not conquered her, she
      is Joan of Arc still! Yes, it was plain to me now that there was one
      spirit there which this dreaded judge could not quell nor make afraid.
    </p>
    <p>
      She moved to her place and mounted the dais and seated herself upon her
      bench, gathering her chains into her lap and nestling her little white
      hands there. Then she waited in tranquil dignity, the only person there
      who seemed unmoved and unexcited. A bronzed and brawny English soldier,
      standing at martial ease in the front rank of the citizen spectators, did
      now most gallantly and respectfully put up his great hand and give her the
      military salute; and she, smiling friendly, put up hers and returned it;
      whereat there was a sympathetic little break of applause, which the judge
      sternly silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now the memorable inquisition called in history the Great Trial began.
      Fifty experts against a novice, and no one to help the novice!
    </p>
    <p>
      The judge summarized the circumstances of the case and the public reports
      and suspicions upon which it was based; then he required Joan to kneel and
      make oath that she would answer with exact truthfulness to all questions
      asked her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s mind was not asleep. It suspected that dangerous possibilities
      might lie hidden under this apparently fair and reasonable demand. She
      answered with the simplicity which so often spoiled the enemy’s best-laid
      plans in the trial at Poitiers, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “No; for I do not know what you are going to ask me; you might ask of me
      things which I would not tell you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      This incensed the Court, and brought out a brisk flurry of angry
      exclamations. Joan was not disturbed. Cauchon raised his voice and began
      to speak in the midst of this noise, but he was so angry that he could
      hardly get his words out. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “With the divine assistance of our Lord we require you to expedite these
      proceedings for the welfare of your conscience. Swear, with your hands
      upon the Gospels, that you will answer true to the questions which shall
      be asked you!” and he brought down his fat hand with a crash upon his
      official table.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan said, with composure:
    </p>
    <p>
      “As concerning my father and mother, and the faith, and what things I have
      done since my coming into France, I will gladly answer; but as regards the
      revelations which I have received from God, my Voices have forbidden me to
      confide them to any save my King—”
     </p>
    <p>
      Here there was another angry outburst of threats and expletives, and much
      movement and confusion; so she had to stop, and wait for the noise to
      subside; then her waxen face flushed a little and she straightened up and
      fixed her eye on the judge, and finished her sentence in a voice that had
      the old ring to it:
    </p>
    <p>
      —“and I will never reveal these things though you cut my head off!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Well, maybe you know what a deliberative body of Frenchmen is like. The
      judge and half the court were on their feet in a moment, and all shaking
      their fists at the prisoner, and all storming and vituperating at once, so
      that you could hardly hear yourself think. They kept this up several
      minutes; and because Joan sat untroubled and indifferent they grew madder
      and noisier all the time. Once she said, with a fleeting trace of the
      old-time mischief in her eye and manner:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Prithee, speak one at a time, fair lords, then I will answer all of you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      At the end of three whole hours of furious debating over the oath, the
      situation had not changed a jot. The Bishop was still requiring an
      unmodified oath, Joan was refusing for the twentieth time to take any
      except the one which she had herself proposed. There was a physical change
      apparent, but it was confined to the court and judge; they were hoarse,
      droopy, exhausted by their long frenzy, and had a sort of haggard look in
      their faces, poor men, whereas Joan was still placid and reposeful and did
      not seem noticeably tired.
    </p>
    <p>
      The noise quieted down; there was a waiting pause of some moments’
      duration. Then the judge surrendered to the prisoner, and with bitterness
      in his voice told her to take the oath after her own fashion. Joan sunk at
      once to her knees; and as she laid her hands upon the Gospels, that big
      English soldier set free his mind:
    </p>
    <p>
      “By God, if she were but English, she were not in this place another half
      a second!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was the soldier in him responding to the soldier in her. But what a
      stinging rebuke it was, what an arraignment of French character and French
      royalty! Would that he could have uttered just that one phrase in the
      hearing of Orleans! I know that that grateful city, that adoring city,
      would have risen to the last man and the last woman, and marched upon
      Rouen. Some speeches—speeches that shame a man and humble him—burn
      themselves into the memory and remain there. That one is burned into mine.
    </p>
    <p>
      After Joan had made oath, Cauchon asked her her name, and where she was
      born, and some questions about her family; also what her age was. She
      answered these. Then he asked her how much education she had.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have learned from my mother the Pater Noster, the Ave Maria, and the
      Belief. All that I know was taught me by my mother.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Questions of this unessential sort dribbled on for a considerable time.
      Everybody was tired out by now, except Joan. The tribunal prepared to
      rise. At this point Cauchon forbade Joan to try to escape from prison,
      upon pain of being held guilty of the crime of heresy—singular
      logic! She answered simply:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I am not bound by this proposition. If I could escape I would not
      reproach myself, for I have given no promise, and I shall not.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she complained of the burden of her chains, and asked that they might
      be removed, for she was strongly guarded in that dungeon and there was no
      need of them. But the Bishop refused, and reminded her that she had broken
      out of prison twice before. Joan of Arc was too proud to insist. She only
      said, as she rose to go with the guard:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is true, I have wanted to escape, and I do want to escape.” Then she
      added, in a way that would touch the pity of anybody, I think, “It is the
      right of every prisoner.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And so she went from the place in the midst of an impressive stillness,
      which made the sharper and more distressful to me the clank of those
      pathetic chains.
    </p>
    <p>
      What presence of mind she had! One could never surprise her out of it. She
      saw Noel and me there when she first took her seat on the bench, and we
      flushed to the forehead with excitement and emotion, but her face showed
      nothing, betrayed nothing. Her eyes sought us fifty times that day, but
      they passed on and there was never any ray of recognition in them. Another
      would have started upon seeing us, and then—why, then there could
      have been trouble for us, of course.
    </p>
    <p>
      We walked slowly home together, each busy with his own grief and saying
      not a word.
    </p>
    <p>
      (1) He kept his word. His account of the Great Trial will be found to be
      in strict and detailed accordance with the sworn facts of history. —TRANSLATOR.
    </p>
    <h3>
      6 The Maid Baffles Her Persecutors
    </h3>
    <p>
      THAT NIGHT Manchon told me that all through the day’s proceedings Cauchon
      had had some clerks concealed in the embrasure of a window who were to
      make a special report garbling Joan’s answers and twisting them from their
      right meaning. Ah, that was surely the cruelest man and the most shameless
      that has lived in this world. But his scheme failed. Those clerks had
      human hearts in them, and their base work revolted them, and they turned
      to and boldly made a straight report, whereupon Cauchon cursed them and
      ordered them out of his presence with a threat of drowning, which was his
      favorite and most frequent menace. The matter had gotten abroad and was
      making great and unpleasant talk, and Cauchon would not try to repeat this
      shabby game right away. It comforted me to hear that.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we arrived at the citadel next morning, we found that a change had
      been made. The chapel had been found too small. The court had now removed
      to a noble chamber situated at the end of the great hall of the castle.
      The number of judges was increased to sixty-two—one ignorant girl
      against such odds, and none to help her.
    </p>
    <p>
      The prisoner was brought in. She was as white as ever, but she was looking
      no whit worse than she looked when she had first appeared the day before.
      Isn’t it a strange thing? Yesterday she had sat five hours on that
      backless bench with her chains in her lap, baited, badgered, persecuted by
      that unholy crew, without even the refreshment of a cup of water—for
      she was never offered anything, and if I have made you know her by this
      time you will know without my telling you that she was not a person likely
      to ask favors of those people. And she had spent the night caged in her
      wintry dungeon with her chains upon her; yet here she was, as I say,
      collected, unworn, and ready for the conflict; yes, and the only person
      there who showed no signs of the wear and worry of yesterday. And her eyes—ah,
      you should have seen them and broken your hearts. Have you seen that
      veiled deep glow, that pathetic hurt dignity, that unsubdued and
      unsubduable spirit that burns and smolders in the eye of a caged eagle and
      makes you feel mean and shabby under the burden of its mute reproach? Her
      eyes were like that. How capable they were, and how wonderful! Yes, at all
      times and in all circumstances they could express as by print every shade
      of the wide range of her moods. In them were hidden floods of gay
      sunshine, the softest and peacefulest twilights, and devastating storms
      and lightnings. Not in this world have there been others that were
      comparable to them. Such is my opinion, and none that had the privilege to
      see them would say otherwise than this which I have said concerning them.
    </p>
    <p>
      The seance began. And how did it begin, should you think? Exactly as it
      began before—with that same tedious thing which had been settled
      once, after so much wrangling. The Bishop opened thus:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You are required now, to take the oath pure and simple, to answer truly
      all questions asked you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan replied placidly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have made oath yesterday, my lord; let that suffice.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Bishop insisted and insisted, with rising temper; Joan but shook her
      head and remained silent. At last she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I made oath yesterday; it is sufficient.” Then she sighed and said, “Of a
      truth, you do burden me too much.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Bishop still insisted, still commanded, but he could not move her. At
      last he gave it up and turned her over for the day’s inquest to an old
      hand at tricks and traps and deceptive plausibilities—Beaupere, a
      doctor of theology. Now notice the form of this sleek strategist’s first
      remark—flung out in an easy, offhand way that would have thrown any
      unwatchful person off his guard:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now, Joan, the matter is very simple; just speak up and frankly and truly
      answer the questions which I am going to ask you, as you have sworn to
      do.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was a failure. Joan was not asleep. She saw the artifice. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “No. You could ask me things which I could not tell you—and would
      not.” Then, reflecting upon how profane and out of character it was for
      these ministers of God to be prying into matters which had proceeded from
      His hands under the awful seal of His secrecy, she added, with a warning
      note in her tone, “If you were well informed concerning me you would wish
      me out of your hands. I have done nothing but by revelation.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Beaupere changed his attack, and began an approach from another quarter.
      He would slip upon her, you see, under cover of innocent and unimportant
      questions.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did you learn any trade at home?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, to sew and to spin.” Then the invincible soldier, victor of Patay,
      conqueror of the lion Talbot, deliverer of Orleans, restorer of a king’s
      crown, commander-in-chief of a nation’s armies, straightened herself
      proudly up, gave her head a little toss, and said with naive complacency,
      “And when it comes to that, I am not afraid to be matched against any
      woman in Rouen!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The crowd of spectators broke out with applause—which pleased Joan—and
      there was many a friendly and petting smile to be seen. But Cauchon
      stormed at the people and warned them to keep still and mind their
      manners.
    </p>
    <p>
      Beaupere asked other questions. Then:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Had you other occupations at home?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. I helped my mother in the household work and went to the pastures
      with the sheep and the cattle.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Her voice trembled a little, but one could hardly notice it. As for me, it
      brought those old enchanted days flooding back to me, and I could not see
      what I was writing for a little while.
    </p>
    <p>
      Beaupere cautiously edged along up with other questions toward the
      forbidden ground, and finally repeated a question which she had refused to
      answer a little while back—as to whether she had received the
      Eucharist in those days at other festivals than that of Easter. Joan
      merely said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Passez outre.” Or, as one might say, “Pass on to matters which you are
      privileged to pry into.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I heard a member of the court say to a neighbor:
    </p>
    <p>
      “As a rule, witnesses are but dull creatures, and an easy prey—yes,
      and easily embarrassed, easily frightened—but truly one can neither
      scare this child nor find her dozing.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Presently the house pricked up its ears and began to listen eagerly, for
      Beaupere began to touch upon Joan’s Voices, a matter of consuming interest
      and curiosity to everybody. His purpose was to trick her into heedless
      sayings that could indicate that the Voices had sometimes given her evil
      advice—hence that they had come from Satan, you see. To have dealing
      with the devil—well, that would send her to the stake in brief
      order, and that was the deliberate end and aim of this trial.
    </p>
    <p>
      “When did you first hear these Voices?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I was thirteen when I first heard a Voice coming from God to help me to
      live well. I was frightened. It came at midday, in my father’s garden in
      the summer.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Had you been fasting?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The day before?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “From what direction did it come?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “From the right—from toward the church.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did it come with a bright light?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, indeed yes. It was brilliant. When I came into France I often heard
      the Voices very loud.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What did the Voice sound like?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It was a noble Voice, and I thought it was sent to me from God. The third
      time I heard it I recognized it as being an angel’s.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You could understand it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Quite easily. It was always clear.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What advice did it give you as to the salvation of your soul?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It told me to live rightly, and be regular in attendance upon the
      services of the Church. And it told me that I must go to France.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “In what species of form did the Voice appear?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan looked suspiciously at he priest a moment, then said, tranquilly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “As to that, I will not tell you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did the Voice seek you often?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. Twice or three times a week, saying, ‘Leave your village and go to
      France.’”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did you father know about your departure?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No. The Voice said, ‘Go to France’; therefore I could not abide at home
      any longer.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What else did it say?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That I should raise the siege of Orleans.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Was that all?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No, I was to go to Vaucouleurs, and Robert de Baudricourt would give me
      soldiers to go with me to France; and I answered, saying that I was a poor
      girl who did not know how to ride, neither how to fight.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she told how she was balked and interrupted at Vaucouleurs, but
      finally got her soldiers, and began her march.
    </p>
    <p>
      “How were you dressed?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The court of Poitiers had distinctly decided and decreed that as God had
      appointed her to do a man’s work, it was meet and no scandal to religion
      that she should dress as a man; but no matter, this court was ready to use
      any and all weapons against Joan, even broken and discredited ones, and
      much was going to be made of this one before this trial should end.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I wore a man’s dress, also a sword which Robert de Baudricourt gave me,
      but no other weapon.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Who was it that advised you to wear the dress of a man?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan was suspicious again. She would not answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      The question was repeated.
    </p>
    <p>
      She refused again.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Answer. It is a command!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Passez outre,” was all she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      So Beaupere gave up the matter for the present.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What did Baudricourt say to you when you left?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He made them that were to go with me promise to take charge of me, and to
      me he said, ‘Go, and let happen what may!’” (Advienne que pourra!) After a
      good deal of questioning upon other matters she was asked again about her
      attire. She said it was necessary for her to dress as a man.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did your Voice advise it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan merely answered placidly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I believe my Voice gave me good advice.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was all that could be got out of her, so the questions wandered to
      other matters, and finally to her first meeting with the King at Chinon.
      She said she chose out the King, who was unknown to her, by the revelation
      of her Voices. All that happened at that time was gone over. Finally:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you still hear those Voices?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “They come to me every day.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What do you ask of them?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I have never asked of them any recompense but the salvation of my soul.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did the Voice always urge you to follow the army?”
     </p>
    <p>
      He is creeping upon her again. She answered:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It required me to remain behind at St. Denis. I would have obeyed if I
      had been free, but I was helpless by my wound, and the knights carried me
      away by force.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “When were you wounded?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I was wounded in the moat before Paris, in the assault.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The next question reveals what Beaupere had been leading up to:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Was it a feast-day?”
     </p>
    <p>
      You see? The suggestion that a voice coming from God would hardly advise
      or permit the violation, by war and bloodshed, of a sacred day.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan was troubled a moment, then she answered yes, it was a feast-day.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now, then, tell the this: did you hold it right to make the attack on
      such a day?”
     </p>
    <p>
      This was a shot which might make the first breach in a wall which had
      suffered no damage thus far. There was immediate silence in the court and
      intense expectancy noticeable all about. But Joan disappointed the house.
      She merely made a slight little motion with her hand, as when one brushes
      away a fly, and said with reposeful indifference:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Passez outre.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Smiles danced for a moment in some of the sternest faces there, and
      several men even laughed outright. The trap had been long and laboriously
      prepared; it fell, and was empty.
    </p>
    <p>
      The court rose. It had sat for hours, and was cruelly fatigued. Most of
      the time had been taken up with apparently idle and purposeless inquiries
      about the Chinon events, the exiled Duke of Orleans, Joan’s first
      proclamation, and so on, but all this seemingly random stuff had really
      been sown thick with hidden traps. But Joan had fortunately escaped them
      all, some by the protecting luck which attends upon ignorance and
      innocence, some by happy accident, the others by force of her best and
      surest helper, the clear vision and lightning intuitions of her
      extraordinary mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now, then, this daily baiting and badgering of this friendless girl, a
      captive in chains, was to continue a long, long time—dignified
      sport, a kennel of mastiffs and bloodhounds harassing a kitten!—and
      I may as well tell you, upon sworn testimony, what it was like from the
      first day to the last. When poor Joan had been in her grave a quarter of a
      century, the Pope called together that great court which was to re-examine
      her history, and whose just verdict cleared her illustrious name from
      every spot and stain, and laid upon the verdict and conduct of our Rouen
      tribunal the blight of its everlasting execrations. Manchon and several of
      the judges who had been members of our court were among the witnesses who
      appeared before that Tribunal of Rehabilitation. Recalling these miserable
      proceedings which I have been telling you about, Manchon testified thus:—here
      you have it, all in fair print in the unofficial history:
    </p>
    <p>
      When Joan spoke of her apparitions she was interrupted at almost every
      word. They wearied her with long and multiplied interrogatories upon all
      sorts of things. Almost every day the interrogatories of the morning
      lasted three or four hours; then from these morning interrogatories they
      extracted the particularly difficult and subtle points, and these served
      as material for the afternoon interrogatories, which lasted two or three
      hours. Moment by moment they skipped from one subject to another; yet in
      spite of this she always responded with an astonishing wisdom and memory.
      She often corrected the judges, saying, “But I have already answered that
      once before—ask the recorder,” referring them to me.
    </p>
    <p>
      And here is the testimony of one of Joan’s judges. Remember, these
      witnesses are not talking about two or three days, they are talking about
      a tedious long procession of days:
    </p>
    <p>
      They asked her profound questions, but she extricated herself quite well.
      Sometimes the questioners changed suddenly and passed on to another
      subject to see if she would not contradict herself. They burdened her with
      long interrogatories of two or three hours, from which the judges
      themselves went forth fatigued. From the snares with which she was beset
      the expertest man in the world could not have extricated himself but with
      difficulty. She gave her responses with great prudence; indeed to such a
      degree that during three weeks I believed she was inspired.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, had she a mind such as I have described? You see what these priests
      say under oath—picked men, men chosen for their places in that
      terrible court on account of their learning, their experience, their keen
      and practised intellects, and their strong bias against the prisoner. They
      make that poor country-girl out the match, and more than the match, of the
      sixty-two trained adepts. Isn’t it so? They from the University of Paris,
      she from the sheepfold and the cow-stable!
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, yes, she was great, she was wonderful. It took six thousand years to
      produce her; her like will not be seen in the earth again in fifty
      thousand. Such is my opinion.
    </p>
    <h3>
      7 Craft That Was in Vain
    </h3>

    <p>
      THE THIRD meeting of the court was in that same spacious chamber, next
      day, 24th of February.
    </p>
    <p>
      How did it begin? In just the same old way. When the preparations were
      ended, the robed sixty-two massed in their chairs and the guards and
      order-keepers distributed to their stations, Cauchon spoke from his throne
      and commanded Joan to lay her hands upon the Gospels and swear to tell the
      truth concerning everything asked her!
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s eyes kindled, and she rose; rose and stood, fine and noble, and
      faced toward the Bishop and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Take care what you do, my lord, you who are my judge, for you take a
      terrible responsibility on yourself and you presume too far.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made a great stir, and Cauchon burst out upon her with an awful threat—the
      threat of instant condemnation unless she obeyed. That made the very bones
      of my body turn cold, and I saw cheeks about me blanch—for it meant
      fire and the stake! But Joan, still standing, answered him back, proud and
      undismayed:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Not all the clergy in Paris and Rouen could condemn me, lacking the
      right!”
     </p>
    <p>
      This made a great tumult, and part of it was applause from the spectators.
      Joan resumed her seat.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Bishop still insisted. Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have already made oath. It is enough.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Bishop shouted:
    </p>
    <p>
      “In refusing to swear, you place yourself under suspicion!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Let be. I have sworn already. It is enough.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Bishop continued to insist. Joan answered that “she would tell what
      she knew—but not all that she knew.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Bishop plagued her straight along, till at last she said, in a weary
      tone:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I came from God; I have nothing more to do here. Return me to God, from
      whom I came.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was piteous to hear; it was the same as saying, “You only want my life;
      take it and let me be at peace.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Bishop stormed out again:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Once more I command you to—”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan cut in with a nonchalant “Passez outre,” and Cauchon retired from the
      struggle; but he retired with some credit this time, for he offered a
      compromise, and Joan, always clear-headed, saw protection for herself in
      it and promptly and willingly accepted it. She was to swear to tell the
      truth “as touching the matters et down in the proces verbal.” They could
      not sail her outside of definite limits, now; her course was over a
      charted sea, henceforth. The Bishop had granted more than he had intended,
      and more than he would honestly try to abide by.
    </p>
    <p>
      By command, Beaupere resumed his examination of the accused. It being
      Lent, there might be a chance to catch her neglecting some detail of her
      religious duties. I could have told him he would fail there. Why, religion
      was her life!
    </p>
    <p>
      “Since when have you eaten or drunk?”
     </p>
    <p>
      If the least thing had passed her lips in the nature of sustenance,
      neither her youth nor the fact that she was being half starved in her
      prison could save her from dangerous suspicion of contempt for the
      commandments of the Church.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have done neither since yesterday at noon.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The priest shifted to the Voices again.
    </p>
    <p>
      “When have you heard your Voice?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yesterday and to-day.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “At what time?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yesterday it was in the morning.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What were you doing then?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I was asleep and it woke me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “By touching your arm?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No, without touching me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did you thank it? Did you kneel?”
     </p>
    <p>
      He had Satan in his mind, you see; and was hoping, perhaps, that by and by
      it could be shown that she had rendered homage to the arch enemy of God
      and man.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, I thanked it; and knelt in my bed where I was chained, and joined my
      hands and begged it to implore God’s help for me so that I might have
      light and instruction as touching the answers I should give here.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then what did the Voice say?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It told me to answer boldly, and God would help me.” Then she turned
      toward Cauchon and said, “You say that you are my judge; now I tell you
      again, take care what you do, for in truth I am sent of God and you are
      putting yourself in great danger.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Beaupere asked her if the Voice’s counsels were not fickle and variable.
    </p>
    <p>
      “No. It never contradicts itself. This very day it has told me again to
      answer boldly.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Has it forbidden you to answer only part of what is asked you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will tell you nothing as to that. I have revelations touching the King
      my master, and those I will not tell you.” Then she was stirred by a great
      emotion, and the tears sprang to her eyes and she spoke out as with strong
      conviction, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I believe wholly—as wholly as I believe the Christian faith and
      that God has redeemed us from the fires of hell, that God speaks to me by
      that Voice!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Being questioned further concerning the Voice, she said she was not at
      liberty to tell all she knew.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you think God would be displeased at your telling the whole truth?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The Voice has commanded me to tell the King certain things, and not you—and
      some very lately—even last night; things which I would he knew. He
      would be more easy at his dinner.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why doesn’t the Voice speak to the King itself, as it did when you were
      with him? Would it not if you asked it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I do not know if it be the wish of God.” She was pensive a moment or two,
      busy with her thoughts and far away, no doubt; then she added a remark in
      which Beaupere, always watchful, always alert, detected a possible opening—a
      chance to set a trap. Do you think he jumped at it instantly, betraying
      the joy he had in his mind, as a young hand at craft and artifice would
      do?
    </p>
    <p>
      No, oh, no, you could not tell that he had noticed the remark at all. He
      slid indifferently away from it at once, and began to ask idle questions
      about other things, so as to slip around and spring on it from behind, so
      to speak: tedious and empty questions as to whether the Voice had told her
      she would escape from this prison; and if it had furnished answers to be
      used by her in to-day’s seance; if it was accompanied with a glory of
      light; if it had eyes, etc. That risky remark of Joan’s was this:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Without the Grace of God I could do nothing.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The court saw the priest’s game, and watched his play with a cruel
      eagerness. Poor Joan was grown dreamy and absent; possibly she was tired.
      Her life was in imminent danger, and she did not suspect it. The time was
      ripe now, and Beaupere quietly and stealthily sprang his trap:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Are you in a state of Grace?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Ah, we had two or three honorable brave men in that pack of judges; and
      Jean Lefevre was one of them. He sprang to his feet and cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is a terrible question! The accused is not obliged to answer it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon’s face flushed black with anger to see this plank flung to the
      perishing child, and he shouted:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Silence! and take your seat. The accused will answer the question!”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was no hope, no way out of the dilemma; for whether she said yes or
      whether she said no, it would be all the same—a disastrous answer,
      for the Scriptures had said one cannot know this thing. Think what hard
      hearts they were to set this fatal snare for that ignorant young girl and
      be proud of such work and happy in it. It was a miserable moment for me
      while we waited; it seemed a year. All the house showed excitement; and
      mainly it was glad excitement. Joan looked out upon these hungering faces
      with innocent, untroubled eyes, and then humbly and gently she brought out
      that immortal answer which brushed the formidable snare away as it had
      been but a cobweb:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If I be not in a state of Grace, I pray God place me in it; if I be in
      it, I pray God keep me so.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Ah, you will never see an effect like that; no, not while you live. For a
      space there was the silence of the grave. Men looked wondering into each
      other’s faces, and some were awed and crossed themselves; and I heard
      Lefevre mutter:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It was beyond the wisdom of man to devise that answer. Whence comes this
      child’s amazing inspirations?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Beaupere presently took up his work again, but the humiliation of his
      defeat weighed upon him, and he made but a rambling and dreary business of
      it, he not being able to put any heart in it.
    </p>
    <p>
      He asked Joan a thousand questions about her childhood and about the oak
      wood, and the fairies, and the children’s games and romps under our dear
      Arbre Fee Bourlemont, and this stirring up of old memories broke her voice
      and made her cry a little, but she bore up as well as she could, and
      answered everything.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then the priest finished by touching again upon the matter of her apparel—a
      matter which was never to be lost sight of in this still-hunt for this
      innocent creature’s life, but kept always hanging over her, a menace
      charged with mournful possibilities:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Would you like a woman’s dress?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Indeed yes, if I may go out from this prison—but here, no.”
     </p>
    <h3>
      8 Joan Tells of Her Visions
    </h3>
    <p>
      THE COURT met next on Monday the 27th. Would you believe it? The Bishop
      ignored the contract limiting the examination to matters set down in the
      proces verbal and again commanded Joan to take the oath without
      reservations. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You should be content I have sworn enough.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She stood her ground, and Cauchon had to yield.
    </p>
    <p>
      The examination was resumed, concerning Joan’s Voices.
    </p>
    <p>
      “You have said that you recognized them as being the voices of angels the
      third time that you heard them. What angels were they?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “St. Catherine and St. Marguerite.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “How did you know that it was those two saints? How could you tell the one
      from the other?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I know it was they; and I know how to distinguish them.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “By what sign?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “By their manner of saluting me. I have been these seven years under their
      direction, and I knew who they were because they told me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Whose was the first Voice that came to you when you were thirteen years
      old?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It was the Voice of St. Michael. I saw him before my eyes; and he was not
      alone, but attended by a cloud of angels.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did you see the archangel and the attendant angels in the body, or in the
      spirit?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I saw them with the eyes of my body, just as I see you; and when they
      went away I cried because they did not take me with them.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made me see that awful shadow again that fell dazzling white upon her
      that day under l’Arbre Fee de Bourlemont, and it made me shiver again,
      though it was so long ago. It was really not very long gone by, but it
      seemed so, because so much had happened since.
    </p>
    <p>
      “In what shape and form did St. Michael appear?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “As to that, I have not received permission to speak.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What did the archangel say to you that first time?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I cannot answer you to-day.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Meaning, I think, that she would have to get permission of her Voices
      first.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently, after some more questions as to the revelations which had been
      conveyed through her to the King, she complained of the unnecessity of all
      this, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I will say again, as I have said before many times in these sittings,
      that I answered all questions of this sort before the court at Poitiers,
      and I would that you wold bring here the record of that court and read
      from that. Prithee, send for that book.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was no answer. It was a subject that had to be got around and put
      aside. That book had wisely been gotten out of the way, for it contained
      things which would be very awkward here.
    </p>
    <p>
      Among them was a decision that Joan’s mission was from God, whereas it was
      the intention of this inferior court to show that it was from the devil;
      also a decision permitting Joan to wear male attire, whereas it was the
      purpose of this court to make the male attire do hurtful work against her.
    </p>
    <p>
      “How was it that you were moved to come into France—by your own
      desire?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, and by command of God. But that it was His will I would not have
      come. I would sooner have had my body torn in sunder by horses than come,
      lacking that.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Beaupere shifted once more to the matter of the male attire, now, and
      proceeded to make a solemn talk about it. That tried Joan’s patience; and
      presently she interrupted and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is a trifling thing and of no consequence. And I did not put it on by
      counsel of any man, but by command of God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Robert de Baudricourt did not order you to wear it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did you think you did well in taking the dress of a man?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I did well to do whatsoever thing God commanded me to do.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But in this particular case do you think you did well in taking the dress
      of a man?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I have done nothing but by command of God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Beaupere made various attempts to lead her into contradictions of herself;
      also to put her words and acts in disaccord with the Scriptures. But it
      was lost time. He did not succeed. He returned to her visions, the light
      which shone about them, her relations with the King, and so on.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Was there an angel above the King’s head the first time you saw him?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “By the Blessed Mary!—”
     </p>
    <p>
      She forced her impatience down, and finished her sentence with
      tranquillity: “If there was one I did not see it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Was there light?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “There were more than three thousand soldiers there, and five hundred
      torches, without taking account of spiritual light.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What made the King believe in the revelations which you brought him?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “He had signs; also the counsel of the clergy.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What revelations were made to the King?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You will not get that out of me this year.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Presently she added: “During three weeks I was questioned by the clergy at
      Chinon and Poitiers. The King had a sign before he would believe; and the
      clergy were of opinion that my acts were good and not evil.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The subject was dropped now for a while, and Beaupere took up the matter
      of the miraculous sword of Fierbois to see if he could not find a chance
      there to fix the crime of sorcery upon Joan.
    </p>
    <p>
      “How did you know that there was an ancient sword buried in the ground
      under the rear of the altar of the church of St. Catherine of Fierbois?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan had no concealments to make as to this:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I knew the sword was there because my Voices told me so; and I sent to
      ask that it be given to me to carry in the wars. It seemed to me that it
      was not very deep in the ground. The clergy of the church caused it to be
      sought for and dug up; and they polished it, and the rust fell easily off
      from it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Were you wearing it when you were taken in battle at Compiegne?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No. But I wore it constantly until I left St. Denis after the attack upon
      Paris.”
     </p>
    <p>
      This sword, so mysteriously discovered and so long and so constantly
      victorious, was suspected of being under the protection of enchantment.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Was that sword blest? What blessing had been invoked upon it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “None. I loved it because it was found in the church of St. Catherine, for
      I loved that church very dearly.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She loved it because it had been built in honor of one of her angels.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Didn’t you lay it upon the altar, to the end that it might be lucky?”
       (The altar of St. Denis.) “No.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Didn’t you pray that it might be made lucky?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Truly it were no harm to wish that my harness might be fortunate.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then it was not that sword which you wore in the field of Compiegne? What
      sword did you wear there?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The sword of the Burgundian Franquet d’Arras, whom I took prisoner in the
      engagement at Lagny. I kept it because it was a good war-sword—good
      to lay on stout thumps and blows with.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She said that quite simply; and the contrast between her delicate little
      self and the grim soldier words which she dropped with such easy
      familiarity from her lips made many spectators smile.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What is become of the other sword? Where is it now?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Is that in the proces verbal?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Beaupere did not answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Which do you love best, your banner or your sword?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Her eye lighted gladly at the mention of her banner, and she cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I love my banner best—oh, forty times more than the sword!
      Sometimes I carried it myself when I charged the enemy, to avoid killing
      any one.” Then she added, naively, and with again that curious contrast
      between her girlish little personality and her subject, “I have never
      killed anyone.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made a great many smile; and no wonder, when you consider what a gentle
      and innocent little thing she looked. One could hardly believe she had
      ever even seen men slaughtered, she look so little fitted for such things.
    </p>
    <p>
      “In the final assault at Orleans did you tell your soldiers that the
      arrows shot by the enemy and the stones discharged from their catapults
      would not strike any one but you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No. And the proof is, that more than a hundred of my men were struck. I
      told them to have no doubts and no fears; that they would raise the siege.
      I was wounded in the neck by an arrow in the assault upon the bastille
      that commanded the bridge, but St. Catherine comforted me and I was cured
      in fifteen days without having to quit the saddle and leave my work.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did you know that you were going to be wounded?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes; and I had told it to the King beforehand. I had it from my Voices.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “When you took Jargeau, why did you not put its commandant to ransom?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I offered him leave to go out unhurt from the place, with all his
      garrison; and if he would not I would take it by storm.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And you did, I believe.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Had your Voices counseled you to take it by storm?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “As to that, I do not remember.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Thus closed a weary long sitting, without result. Every device that could
      be contrived to trap Joan into wrong thinking, wrong doing, or disloyalty
      to the Church, or sinfulness as a little child at home or later, had been
      tried, and none of them had succeeded. She had come unscathed through the
      ordeal.
    </p>
    <p>
      Was the court discouraged? No. Naturally it was very much surprised, very
      much astonished, to find its work baffling and difficult instead of simple
      and easy, but it had powerful allies in the shape of hunger, cold,
      fatigue, persecution, deception, and treachery; and opposed to this array
      nothing but a defenseless and ignorant girl who must some time or other
      surrender to bodily and mental exhaustion or get caught in one of the
      thousand traps set for her.
    </p>
    <p>
      And had the court made no progress during these seemingly resultless
      sittings? Yes. It had been feeling its way, groping here, groping there,
      and had found one or two vague trails which might freshen by and by and
      lead to something. The male attire, for instance, and the visions and
      Voices. Of course no one doubted that she had seen supernatural beings and
      been spoken to and advised by them. And of course no one doubted that by
      supernatural help miracles had been done by Joan, such as choosing out the
      King in a crowd when she had never seen him before, and her discovery of
      the sword buried under the altar. It would have been foolish to doubt
      these things, for we all know that the air is full of devils and angels
      that are visible to traffickers in magic on the one hand and to the
      stainlessly holy on the other; but what many and perhaps most did doubt
      was, that Joan’s visions, Voices, and miracles came from God. It was hoped
      that in time they could be proven to have been of satanic origin.
      Therefore, as you see, the court’s persistent fashion of coming back to
      that subject every little while and spooking around it and prying into it
      was not to pass the time—it had a strictly business end in view.
    </p>
    <h3>
      9 Her Sure Deliverance Foretold
    </h3>
    <p>
      THE NEXT sitting opened on Thursday the first of March. Fifty-eight judges
      present—the others resting.
    </p>
    <p>
      As usual, Joan was required to take an oath without reservations. She
      showed no temper this time. She considered herself well buttressed by the
      proces verbal compromise which Cauchon was so anxious to repudiate and
      creep out of; so she merely refused, distinctly and decidedly; and added,
      in a spirit of fairness and candor:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But as to matters set down in the proces verbal, I will freely tell the
      whole truth—yes, as freely and fully as if I were before the Pope.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Here was a chance! We had two or three Popes, then; only one of them could
      be the true Pope, of course. Everybody judiciously shirked the question of
      which was the true Pope and refrained from naming him, it being clearly
      dangerous to go into particulars in this matter. Here was an opportunity
      to trick an unadvised girl into bringing herself into peril, and the
      unfair judge lost no time in taking advantage of it. He asked, in a
      plausibly indolent and absent way:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Which one do you consider to be the true Pope?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The house took an attitude of deep attention, and so waited to hear the
      answer and see the prey walk into the trap. But when the answer came it
      covered the judge with confusion, and you could see many people covertly
      chuckling. For Joan asked in a voice and manner which almost deceived even
      me, so innocent it seemed:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Are there two?”
     </p>
    <p>
      One of the ablest priests in that body and one of the best swearers there,
      spoke right out so that half the house heard him, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “By God, it was a master stroke!”
     </p>
    <p>
      As soon as the judge was better of his embarrassment he came back to the
      charge, but was prudent and passed by Joan’s question:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Is it true that you received a letter from the Count of Armagnac asking
      you which of the three Popes he ought to obey?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, and answered it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Copies of both letters were produced and read. Joan said that hers had not
      been quite strictly copied. She said she had received the Count’s letter
      when she was just mounting her horse; and added:
    </p>
    <p>
      “So, in dictating a word or two of reply I said I would try to answer him
      from Paris or somewhere where I could be at rest.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was asked again which Pope she had considered the right one.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I was not able to instruct the Count of Armagnac as to which one he ought
      to obey”; then she added, with a frank fearlessness which sounded fresh
      and wholesome in that den of trimmers and shufflers, “but as for me, I
      hold that we are bound to obey our Lord the Pope who is at Rome.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The matter was dropped. They produced and read a copy of Joan’s first
      effort at dictating—her proclamation summoning the English to retire
      from the siege of Orleans and vacate France—truly a great and fine
      production for an unpractised girl of seventeen.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you acknowledge as your own the document which has just been read?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, except that there are errors in it—words which make me give
      myself too much importance.” I saw what was coming; I was troubled and
      ashamed. “For instance, I did not say ‘Deliver up to the Maid’ (rendez au
      la Pucelle); I said ‘Deliver up to the King’ (rendez au Roi); and I did
      not call myself ‘Commander-in-Chief’ (chef de guerre). All those are words
      which my secretary substituted; or mayhap he misheard me or forgot what I
      said.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She did not look at me when she said it: she spared me that embarrassment.
      I hadn’t misheard her at all, and hadn’t forgotten. I changed her language
      purposely, for she was Commander-in-Chief and entitled to call herself so,
      and it was becoming and proper, too; and who was going to surrender
      anything to the King?—at that time a stick, a cipher? If any
      surrendering was done, it would be to the noble Maid of Vaucouleurs,
      already famed and formidable though she had not yet struck a blow.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, there would have been a fine and disagreeable episode (for me) there,
      if that pitiless court had discovered that the very scribbler of that
      piece of dictation, secretary to Joan of Arc, was present—and not
      only present, but helping build the record; and not only that, but
      destined at a far distant day to testify against lies and perversions
      smuggled into it by Cauchon and deliver them over to eternal infamy!
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you acknowledge that you dictated this proclamation?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I do.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Have you repented of it? Do you retract it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Ah, then she was indignant!
    </p>
    <p>
      “No! Not even these chains”—and she shook them—“not even these
      chains can chill the hopes that I uttered there. And more!”—she
      rose, and stood a moment with a divine strange light kindling in her face,
      then her words burst forth as in a flood—“I warn you now that before
      seven years a disaster will smite the English, oh, many fold greater than
      the fall of Orleans! and—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Silence! Sit down!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “—and then, soon after, they will lose all France!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Now consider these things. The French armies no longer existed. The French
      cause was standing still, our King was standing still, there was no hint
      that by and by the Constable Richemont would come forward and take up the
      great work of Joan of Arc and finish it. In face of all this, Joan made
      that prophecy—made it with perfect confidence—and it came
      true. For within five years Paris fell—1436—and our King
      marched into it flying the victor’s flag. So the first part of the
      prophecy was then fulfilled—in fact, almost the entire prophecy;
      for, with Paris in our hands, the fulfilment of the rest of it was
      assured.
    </p>
    <p>
      Twenty years later all France was ours excepting a single town—Calais.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now that will remind you of an earlier prophecy of Joan’s. At the time
      that she wanted to take Paris and could have done it with ease if our King
      had but consented, she said that that was the golden time; that, with
      Paris ours, all France would be ours in six months. But if this golden
      opportunity to recover France was wasted, said she, “I give you twenty
      years to do it in.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was right. After Paris fell, in 1436, the rest of the work had to be
      done city by city, castle by castle, and it took twenty years to finish
      it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, it was the first day of March, 1431, there in the court, that she
      stood in the view of everybody and uttered that strange and incredible
      prediction. Now and then, in this world, somebody’s prophecy turns up
      correct, but when you come to look into it there is sure to be
      considerable room for suspicion that the prophecy was made after the fact.
      But here the matter is different. There in that court Joan’s prophecy was
      set down in the official record at the hour and moment of its utterance,
      years before the fulfilment, and there you may read it to this day.
    </p>
    <p>
      Twenty-five years after Joan’s death the record was produced in the great
      Court of the Rehabilitation and verified under oath by Manchon and me, and
      surviving judges of our court confirmed the exactness of the record in
      their testimony.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan’ startling utterance on that now so celebrated first of March stirred
      up a great turmoil, and it was some time before it quieted down again.
      Naturally, everybody was troubled, for a prophecy is a grisly and awful
      thing, whether one thinks it ascends from hell or comes down from heaven.
    </p>
    <p>
      All that these people felt sure of was, that the inspiration back of it
      was genuine and puissant.
    </p>
    <p>
      They would have given their right hands to know the source of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last the questions began again.
    </p>
    <p>
      “How do you know that those things are going to happen?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I know it by revelation. And I know it as surely as I know that you sit
      here before me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      This sort of answer was not going to allay the spreading uneasiness.
      Therefore, after some further dallying the judge got the subject out of
      the way and took up one which he could enjoy more.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What languages do your Voices speak?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “French.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “St. Marguerite, too?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Verily; why not? She is on our side, not on the English!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Saints and angels who did not condescend to speak English is a grave
      affront. They could not be brought into court and punished for contempt,
      but the tribunal could take silent note of Joan’s remark and remember it
      against her; which they did. It might be useful by and by.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do your saints and angels wear jewelry?—crowns, rings, earrings?”
     </p>
    <p>
      To Joan, questions like these were profane frivolities and not worthy of
      serious notice; she answered indifferently. But the question brought to
      her mind another matter, and she turned upon Cauchon and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I had two rings. They have been taken away from me during my captivity.
      You have one of them. It is the gift of my brother. Give it back to me. If
      not to me, then I pray that it be given to the Church.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The judges conceived the idea that maybe these rings were for the working
      of enchantments.
    </p>
    <p>
      Perhaps they could be made to do Joan a damage.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Where is the other ring?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The Burgundians have it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Where did you get it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “My father and mother gave it to me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Describe it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is plain and simple and has ‘Jesus and Mary’ engraved upon it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Everybody could see that that was not a valuable equipment to do devil’s
      work with. So that trail was not worth following. Still, to make sure, one
      of the judges asked Joan if she had ever cured sick people by touching
      them with the ring. She said no.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now as concerning the fairies, that were used to abide near by Domremy
      whereof there are many reports and traditions. It is said that your
      godmother surprised these creatures on a summer’s night dancing under the
      tree called l’Arbre Fee de Bourlemont. Is it not possible that your
      pretended saints and angels are but those fairies?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Is that in your proces?”
     </p>
    <p>
      She made no other answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Have you not conversed with St. Marguerite and St. Catherine under that
      tree?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I do not know.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Or by the fountain near the tree?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, sometimes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What promises did they make you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “None but such as they had God’s warrant for.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But what promises did they make?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is not in your proces; yet I will say this much: they told me that
      the King would become master of his kingdom in spite of his enemies.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And what else?”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a pause; then she said humbly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “They promised to lead me to Paradise.”
     </p>
    <p>
      If faces do really betray what is passing in men’s minds, a fear came upon
      many in that house, at this time, that maybe, after all, a chosen servant
      and herald of God was here being hunted to her death. The interest
      deepened. Movements and whisperings ceased: the stillness became almost
      painful.
    </p>
    <p>
      Have you noticed that almost from the beginning the nature of the
      questions asked Joan showed that in some way or other the questioner very
      often already knew his fact before he asked his question? Have you noticed
      that somehow or other the questioners usually knew just how and were to
      search for Joan’s secrets; that they really knew the bulk of her privacies—a
      fact not suspected by her—and that they had no task before them but
      to trick her into exposing those secrets?
    </p>
    <p>
      Do you remember Loyseleur, the hypocrite, the treacherous priest, tool of
      Cauchon? Do you remember that under the sacred seal of the confessional
      Joan freely and trustingly revealed to him everything concerning her
      history save only a few things regarding her supernatural revelations
      which her Voices had forbidden her to tell to any one—and that the
      unjust judge, Cauchon, was a hidden listener all the time?
    </p>
    <p>
      Now you understand how the inquisitors were able to devise that long array
      of minutely prying questions; questions whose subtlety and ingenuity and
      penetration are astonishing until we come to remember Loyseleur’s
      performance and recognize their source. Ah, Bishop of Beauvais, you are
      now lamenting this cruel iniquity these many years in hell! Yes verily,
      unless one has come to your help. There is but one among the redeemed that
      would do it; and it is futile to hope that that one has not already done
      it—Joan of Arc.
    </p>
    <p>
      We will return to the questionings.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did they make you still another promise?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, but that is not in your proces. I will not tell it now, but before
      three months I will tell it you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The judge seems to know the matter he is asking about, already; one gets
      this idea from his next question.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did your Voices tell you that you would be liberated before three
      months?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan often showed a little flash of surprise at the good guessing of the
      judges, and she showed one this time. I was frequently in terror to find
      my mind (which I could not control) criticizing the Voices and saying,
      “They counsel her to speak boldly—a thing which she would do without
      any suggestion from them or anybody else—but when it comes to
      telling her any useful thing, such as how these conspirators manage to
      guess their way so skilfully into her affairs, they are always off
      attending to some other business.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I am reverent by nature; and when such thoughts swept through my head they
      made me cold with fear, and if there was a storm and thunder at the time,
      I was so ill that I could but with difficulty abide at my post and do my
      work.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan answered:
    </p>
    <p>
      “That is not in your proces. I do not know when I shall be set free, but
      some who wish me out of this world will go from it before me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made some of them shiver.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Have your Voices told you that you will be delivered from this prison?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Without a doubt they had, and the judge knew it before he asked the
      question.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ask me again in three months and I will tell you.” She said it with such
      a happy look, the tired prisoner! And I? And Noel Rainguesson, drooping
      yonder?—why, the floods of joy went streaming through us from crown
      to sole! It was all that we could do to hold still and keep from making
      fatal exposure of our feelings.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was to be set free in three months. That was what she meant; we saw
      it. The Voices had told her so, and told her true—true to the very
      day—May 30th. But we know now that they had mercifully hidden from
      her how she was to be set free, but left her in ignorance. Home again!
    </p>
    <p>
      That day was our understanding of it—Noel’s and mine; that was our
      dream; and now we would count the days, the hours, the minutes. They would
      fly lightly along; they would soon be over.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, we would carry our idol home; and there, far from the pomps and
      tumults of the world, we would take up our happy life again and live it
      out as we had begun it, in the free air and the sunshine, with the
      friendly sheep and the friendly people for comrades, and the grace and
      charm of the meadows, the woods, and the river always before our eyes and
      their deep peace in our hearts. Yes, that was our dream, the dream that
      carried us bravely through that three months to an exact and awful
      fulfilment, the thought of which would have killed us, I think, if we had
      foreknown it and been obliged to bear the burden of it upon our hearts the
      half of those weary days.
    </p>
    <p>
      Our reading of the prophecy was this: We believed the King’s soul was
      going to be smitten with remorse; and that he would privately plan a
      rescue with Joan’s old lieutenants, D’Alencon and the Bastard and La Hire,
      and that this rescue would take place at the end of the three months. So
      we made up our minds to be ready and take a hand in it.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the present and also in later sittings Joan was urged to name the exact
      day of her deliverance; but she could not do that. She had not the
      permission of her Voices. Moreover, the Voices themselves did not name the
      precise day. Ever since the fulfilment of the prophecy, I have believed
      that Joan had the idea that her deliverance was going to come in the form
      of death. But not that death! Divine as she was, dauntless as she was in
      battle, she was human also. She was not solely a saint, an angel, she was
      a clay-made girl also—as human a girl as any in the world, and full
      of a human girl’s sensitiveness and tenderness and delicacies. And so,
      that death! No, she could not have lived the three months with that one
      before her, I think. You remember that the first time she was wounded she
      was frightened, and cried, just as any other girl of seventeen would have
      done, although she had known for eighteen days that she was going to be
      wounded on that very day. No, she was not afraid of any ordinary death,
      and an ordinary death was what she believed the prophecy of deliverance
      meant, I think, for her face showed happiness, not horror, when she
      uttered it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now I will explain why I think as I do. Five weeks before she was captured
      in the battle of Compiegne, her Voices told her what was coming. They did
      not tell her the day or the place, but said she would be taken prisoner
      and that it would be before the feast of St. John. She begged that death,
      certain and swift, should be her fate, and the captivity brief; for she
      was a free spirit, and dreaded the confinement. The Voices made no
      promise, but only told her to bear whatever came. Now as they did not
      refuse the swift death, a hopeful young thing like Joan would naturally
      cherish that fact and make the most of it, allowing it to grow and
      establish itself in her mind. And so now that she was told she was to be
      “delivered” in three months, I think she believed it meant that she would
      die in her bed in the prison, and that that was why she looked happy and
      content—the gates of Paradise standing open for her, the time so
      short, you see, her troubles so soon to be over, her reward so close at
      hand. Yes, that would make her look happy, that would make her patient and
      bold, and able to fight her fight out like a soldier. Save herself if she
      could, of course, and try for the best, for that was the way she was made;
      but die with her face to the front if die she must.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then later, when she charged Cauchon with trying to kill her with a
      poisoned fish, her notion that she was to be “delivered” by death in the
      prison—if she had it, and I believe she had—would naturally be
      greatly strengthened, you see.
    </p>
    <p>
      But I am wandering from the trial. Joan was asked to definitely name the
      time that she would be delivered from prison.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have always said that I was not permitted to tell you everything. I am
      to be set free, and I desire to ask leave of my Voices to tell you the
      day. That is why I wish for delay.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Do your Voices forbid you to tell the truth?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Is it that you wish to know matters concerning the King of France? I tell
      you again that he will regain his kingdom, and that I know it as well as I
      know that you sit here before me in this tribunal.” She sighed and, after
      a little pause, added: “I should be dead but for this revelation, which
      comforts me always.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Some trivial questions were asked her about St. Michael’s dress and
      appearance. She answered them with dignity, but one saw that they gave her
      pain. After a little she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have great joy in seeing him, for when I see him I have the feeling
      that I am not in mortal sin.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She added, “Sometimes St. Marguerite and St. Catherine have allowed me to
      confess myself to them.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Here was a possible chance to set a successful snare for her innocence.
    </p>
    <p>
      “When you confessed were you in mortal sin, do you think?”
     </p>
    <p>
      But her reply did her no hurt. So the inquiry was shifted once more to the
      revelations made to the King—secrets which the court had tried again
      and again to force out of Joan, but without success.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now as to the sign given to the King—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I have already told you that I will tell you nothing about it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Do you know what the sign was?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “As to that, you will not find out from me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      All this refers to Joan’s secret interview with the King—held apart,
      though two or three others were present. It was known—through
      Loyseleur, of course—that this sign was a crown and was a pledge of
      the verity of Joan’s mission. But that is all a mystery until this day—the
      nature of the crown, I mean—and will remain a mystery to the end of
      time. We can never know whether a real crown descended upon the King’s
      head, or only a symbol, the mystic fabric of a vision.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did you see a crown upon the King’s head when he received the
      revelation?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I cannot tell you as to that, without perjury.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did the King have that crown at Rheims?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I think the King put upon his head a crown which he found there; but a
      much richer one was brought him afterward.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Have you seen that one?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I cannot tell you, without perjury. But whether I have seen it or not, I
      have heard say that it was rich and magnificent.”
     </p>
    <p>
      They went on and pestered her to weariness about that mysterious crown,
      but they got nothing more out of her. The sitting closed. A long, hard day
      for all of us.
    </p>
    <h3>
      10 The Inquisitors at Their Wits’ End
    </h3>

    <p>
      THE COURT rested a day, then took up work again on Saturday, the third of
      March.
    </p>
    <p>
      This was one of our stormiest sessions. The whole court was out of
      patience; and with good reason. These threescore distinguished churchmen,
      illustrious tacticians, veteran legal gladiators, had left important posts
      where their supervision was needed, to journey hither from various regions
      and accomplish a most simple and easy matter—condemn and send to
      death a country-lass of nineteen who could neither read nor write, knew
      nothing of the wiles and perplexities of legal procedure, could not call a
      single witness in her defense, was allowed no advocate or adviser, and
      must conduct her case by herself against a hostile judge and a packed
      jury. In two hours she would be hopelessly entangled, routed, defeated,
      convicted. Nothing could be more certain that this—so they thought.
      But it was a mistake. The two hours had strung out into days; what
      promised to be a skirmish had expanded into a siege; the thing which had
      looked so easy had proven to be surprisingly difficult; the light victim
      who was to have been puffed away like a feather remained planted like a
      rock; and on top of all this, if anybody had a right to laugh it was the
      country-lass and not the court.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was not doing that, for that was not her spirit; but others were doing
      it. The whole town was laughing in its sleeve, and the court knew it, and
      its dignity was deeply hurt. The members could not hide their annoyance.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so, as I have said, the session was stormy. It was easy to see that
      these men had made up their minds to force words from Joan to-day which
      should shorten up her case and bring it to a prompt conclusion. It shows
      that after all their experience with her they did not know her yet.
    </p>
    <p>
      They went into the battle with energy. They did not leave the questioning
      to a particular member; no, everybody helped. They volleyed questions at
      Joan from all over the house, and sometimes so many were talking at once
      that she had to ask them to deliver their fire one at a time and not by
      platoons. The beginning was as usual:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You are once more required to take the oath pure and simple.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will answer to what is in the proces verbal. When I do more, I will
      choose the occasion for myself.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That old ground was debated and fought over inch by inch with great
      bitterness and many threats. But Joan remained steadfast, and the
      questionings had to shift to other matters. Half an hour was spent over
      Joan’s apparitions—their dress, hair, general appearance, and so on—in
      the hope of fishing something of a damaging sort out of the replies; but
      with no result.
    </p>
    <p>
      Next, the male attire was reverted to, of course. After many well-worn
      questions had been re-asked, one or two new ones were put forward.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did not the King or the Queen sometimes ask you to quit the male dress?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That is not in your proces.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Do you think you would have sinned if you had taken the dress of your
      sex?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I have done best to serve and obey my sovereign Lord and Master.”
     </p>
    <p>
      After a while the matter of Joan’s Standard was taken up, in the hope of
      connecting magic and witchcraft with it.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did not your men copy your banner in their pennons?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The lancers of my guard did it. It was to distinguish them from the rest
      of the forces. It was their own idea.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Were they often renewed?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. When the lances were broken they were renewed.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The purpose of the question unveils itself in the next one.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did you not say to your men that pennons made like your banner would be
      lucky?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The soldier-spirit in Joan was offended at this puerility. She drew
      herself up, and said with dignity and fire: “What I said to them was,
      ‘Ride those English down!’ and I did it myself.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Whenever she flung out a scornful speech like that at these French menials
      in English livery it lashed them into a rage; and that is what happened
      this time. There were ten, twenty, sometimes even thirty of them on their
      feet at a time, storming at the prisoner minute after minute, but Joan was
      not disturbed.
    </p>
    <p>
      By and by there was peace, and the inquiry was resumed.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was now sought to turn against Joan the thousand loving honors which
      had been done her when she was raising France out of the dirt and shame of
      a century of slavery and castigation.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did you not cause paintings and images of yourself to be made?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No. At Arras I saw a painting of myself kneeling in armor before the King
      and delivering him a letter; but I caused no such things to be made.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Were not masses and prayers said in your honor?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “If it was done it was not by my command. But if any prayed for me I think
      it was no harm.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did the French people believe you were sent of God?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “As to that, I know not; but whether they believed it or not, I was not
      the less sent of God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “If they thought you were sent of God, do you think it was well thought?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “If they believed it, their trust was not abused.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What impulse was it, think you, that moved the people to kiss your hands,
      your feet, and your vestments?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “They were glad to see me, and so they did those things; and I could not
      have prevented them if I had had the heart. Those poor people came
      lovingly to me because I had not done them any hurt, but had done the best
      I could for them according to my strength.”
     </p>
    <p>
      See what modest little words she uses to describe that touching spectacle,
      her marches about France walled in on both sides by the adoring
      multitudes: “They were glad to see me.” Glad?
    </p>
    <p>
      Why they were transported with joy to see her. When they could not kiss
      her hands or her feet, they knelt in the mire and kissed the hoof-prints
      of her horse. They worshiped her; and that is what these priests were
      trying to prove. It was nothing to them that she was not to blame for what
      other people did. No, if she was worshiped, it was enough; she was guilty
      of mortal sin.
    </p>
    <p>
      Curious logic, one must say.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did you not stand sponsor for some children baptized at Rheims?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “At Troyes I did, and at St. Denis; and I named the boys Charles, in honor
      of the King, and the girls I named Joan.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did not women touch their rings to those which you wore?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, many did, but I did not know their reason for it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “At Rheims was your Standard carried into the church? Did you stand at the
      altar with it in your hand at the Coronation?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “In passing through the country did you confess yourself in the Churches
      and receive the sacrament?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “In the dress of a man?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. But I do not remember that I was in armor.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was almost a concession! almost a half-surrender of the permission
      granted her by the Church at Poitiers to dress as a man. The wily court
      shifted to another matter: to pursue this one at this time might call
      Joan’s attention to her small mistake, and by her native cleverness she
      might recover her lost ground. The tempestuous session had worn her and
      drowsed her alertness.
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is reported that you brought a dead child to life in the church at
      Lagny. Was that in answer to your prayers?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “As to that, I have no knowledge. Other young girls were praying for the
      child, and I joined them and prayed also, doing no more than they.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Continue.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “While we prayed it came to life, and cried. It had been dead three days,
      and was as black as my doublet. It was straight way baptized, then it
      passed from life again and was buried in holy ground.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why did you jump from the tower of Beaurevoir by night and try to
      escape?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I would go to the succor of Compiegne.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was insinuated that this was an attempt to commit the deep crime of
      suicide to avoid falling into the hands of the English.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did you not say that you would rather die than be delivered into the
      power of the English?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan answered frankly; without perceiving the trap:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes; my words were, that I would rather that my soul be returned unto God
      than that I should fall into the hands of the English.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was now insinuated that when she came to, after jumping from the tower,
      she was angry and blasphemed the name of God; and that she did it again
      when she heard of the defection of the Commandant of Soissons. She was
      hurt and indignant at this, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is not true. I have never cursed. It is not my custom to swear.”
     </p>
    <h3>
      11 The Court Reorganized for Assassination
    </h3>
    <p>
      A HALT was called. It was time. Cauchon was losing ground in the fight,
      Joan was gaining it.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were signs that here and there in the court a judge was being
      softened toward Joan by her courage, her presence of mind, her fortitude,
      her constancy, her piety, her simplicity and candor, her manifest purity,
      the nobility of her character, her fine intelligence, and the good brave
      fight she was making, all friendless and alone, against unfair odds, and
      there was grave room for fear that this softening process would spread
      further and presently bring Cauchon’s plans in danger.
    </p>
    <p>
      Something must be done, and it was done. Cauchon was not distinguished for
      compassion, but he now gave proof that he had it in his character. He
      thought it pity to subject so many judges to the prostrating fatigues of
      this trial when it could be conducted plenty well enough by a handful of
      them. Oh, gentle judge! But he did not remember to modify the fatigues for
      the little captive.
    </p>
    <p>
      He would let all the judges but a handful go, but he would select the
      handful himself, and he did.
    </p>
    <p>
      He chose tigers. If a lamb or two got in, it was by oversight, not
      intention; and he knew what to do with lambs when discovered.
    </p>
    <p>
      He called a small council now, and during five days they sifted the huge
      bulk of answers thus far gathered from Joan. They winnowed it of all
      chaff, all useless matter—that is, all matter favorable to Joan;
      they saved up all matter which could be twisted to her hurt, and out of
      this they constructed a basis for a new trial which should have the
      semblance of a continuation of the old one. Another change. It was plain
      that the public trial had wrought damage: its proceedings had been
      discussed all over the town and had moved many to pity the abused
      prisoner. There should be no more of that. The sittings should be secret
      hereafter, and no spectators admitted. So Noel could come no more. I sent
      this news to him. I had not the heart to carry it myself. I would give the
      pain a chance to modify before I should see him in the evening.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the 10th of March the secret trial began. A week had passed since I had
      seen Joan. Her appearance gave me a great shock. She looked tired and
      weak. She was listless and far away, and her answers showed that she was
      dazed and not able to keep perfect run of all that was done and said.
      Another court would not have taken advantage of her state, seeing that her
      life was at stake here, but would have adjourned and spared her. Did this
      one? No; it worried her for hours, and with a glad and eager ferocity,
      making all it could out of this great chance, the first one it had had.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was tortured into confusing herself concerning the “sign” which had
      been given the King, and the next day this was continued hour after hour.
      As a result, she made partial revealments of particulars forbidden by her
      Voices; and seemed to me to state as facts things which were but
      allegories and visions mixed with facts.
    </p>
    <p>
      The third day she was brighter, and looked less worn. She was almost her
      normal self again, and did her work well. Many attempts were made to
      beguile her into saying indiscreet things, but she saw the purpose in view
      and answered with tact and wisdom.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you know if St. Catherine and St. Marguerite hate the English?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “They love whom Our Lord loves, and hate whom He hates.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Does God hate the English?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Of the love or the hatred of God toward the English I know nothing.” Then
      she spoke up with the old martial ring in her voice and the old audacity
      in her words, and added, “But I know this—that God will send victory
      to the French, and that all the English will be flung out of France but
      the dead ones!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Was God on the side of the English when they were prosperous in France?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I do not know if God hates the French, but I think that He allowed them
      to be chastised for their sins.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was a sufficiently naive way to account for a chastisement which had
      now strung out for ninety-six years. But nobody found fault with it. There
      was nobody there who would not punish a sinner ninety-six years if he
      could, nor anybody there who would ever dream of such a thing as the
      Lord’s being any shade less stringent than men.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Have you ever embraced St. Marguerite and St. Catherine?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, both of them.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The evil face of Cauchon betrayed satisfaction when she said that.
    </p>
    <p>
      “When you hung garlands upon L’Arbre Fee Bourlemont, did you do it in
      honor of your apparitions?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Satisfaction again. No doubt Cauchon would take it for granted that she
      hung them there out of sinful love for the fairies.
    </p>
    <p>
      “When the saints appeared to you did you bow, did you make reverence, did
      you kneel?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes; I did them the most honor and reverence that I could.”
     </p>
    <p>
      A good point for Cauchon if he could eventually make it appear that these
      were no saints to whom she had done reverence, but devils in disguise.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now there was the matter of Joan’s keeping her supernatural commerce a
      secret from her parents. Much might be made of that. In fact, particular
      emphasis had been given to it in a private remark written in the margin of
      the proces: “She concealed her visions from her parents and from every
      one.” Possibly this disloyalty to her parents might itself be the sign of
      the satanic source of her mission.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you think it was right to go away to the wars without getting your
      parents’ leave? It is written one must honor his father and his mother.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I have obeyed them in all things but that. And for that I have begged
      their forgiveness in a letter and gotten it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, you asked their pardon? So you knew you were guilty of sin in going
      without their leave!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan was stirred. Her eyes flashed, and she exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I was commanded of God, and it was right to go! If I had had a hundred
      fathers and mothers and been a king’s daughter to boot I would have gone.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did you never ask your Voices if you might tell your parents?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “They were willing that I should tell them, but I would not for anything
      have given my parents that pain.”
     </p>
    <p>
      To the minds of the questioners this headstrong conduct savored of pride.
      That sort of pride would move one to see sacrilegious adorations.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Did not your Voices call you Daughter of God?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan answered with simplicity, and unsuspiciously:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes; before the siege of Orleans and since, they have several times
      called me Daughter of God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Further indications of pride and vanity were sought.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What horse were you riding when you were captured? Who gave it you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The King.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You had other things—riches—of the King?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “For myself I had horses and arms, and money to pay the service in my
      household.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Had you not a treasury?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. Ten or twelve thousand crowns.” Then she said with naivete “It was
      not a great sum to carry on a war with.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You have it yet?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No. It is the King’s money. My brothers hold it for him.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What were the arms which you left as an offering in the church of St.
      Denis?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “My suit of silver mail and a sword.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Did you put them there in order that they might be adored?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No. It was but an act of devotion. And it is the custom of men of war who
      have been wounded to make such offering there. I had been wounded before
      Paris.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Nothing appealed to these stony hearts, those dull imaginations—not
      even this pretty picture, so simply drawn, of the wounded girl-soldier
      hanging her toy harness there in curious companionship with the grim and
      dusty iron mail of the historic defenders of France. No, there was nothing
      in it for them; nothing, unless evil and injury for that innocent creature
      could be gotten out of it somehow.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Which aided most—you the Standard, or the Standard you?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Whether it was the Standard or whether it was I, is nothing—the
      victories came from God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But did you base your hopes of victory in yourself or in your Standard?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “In neither. In God, and not otherwise.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Was not your Standard waved around the King’s head at the Coronation?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No. It was not.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Why was it that your Standard had place at the crowning of the King in
      the Cathedral of Rheims, rather than those of the other captains?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then, soft and low, came that touching speech which will live as long as
      language lives, and pass into all tongues, and move all gentle hearts
      wheresoever it shall come, down to the latest day:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It had borne the burden, it had earned the honor.” (1) How simple it is,
      and how beautiful. And how it beggars the studies eloquence of the masters
      of oratory. Eloquence was a native gift of Joan of Arc; it came from her
      lips without effort and without preparation. Her words were as sublime as
      her deeds, as sublime as her character; they had their source in a great
      heart and were coined in a great brain.
    </p>
    <p>
      (1) What she said has been many times translated, but never with success.
      There is a haunting pathos about the original which eludes all efforts to
      convey it into our tongue. It is as subtle as an odor, and escapes in the
      transmission. Her words were these:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Il avait, a la peine, c’etait bien raison qu’il fut a l’honneur.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Monseigneur Ricard, Honorary Vicar-General to the Archbishop of Aix,
      finely speaks of it (Jeanne d’Arc la Venerable, page 197) as “that sublime
      reply, enduring in the history of celebrated sayings like the cry of a
      French and Christian soul wounded unto death in its patriotism and its
      faith.” — TRANSLATOR.
    </p>
    <h3>
      12 Joan’s Master-Stroke Diverted
    </h3>
    <p>
      NOW, as a next move, this small secret court of holy assassins did a thing
      so base that even at this day, in my old age, it is hard to speak of it
      with patience.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the beginning of her commerce with her Voices there at Domremy, the
      child Joan solemnly devoted her life to God, vowing her pure body and her
      pure soul to His service. You will remember that her parents tried to stop
      her from going to the wars by haling her to the court at Toul to compel
      her to make a marriage which she had never promised to make—a
      marriage with our poor, good, windy, big, hard-fighting, and most dear and
      lamented comrade, the Standard-Bearer, who fell in honorable battle and
      sleeps with God these sixty years, peace to his ashes! And you will
      remember how Joan, sixteen years old, stood up in that venerable court and
      conducted her case all by herself, and tore the poor Paladin’s case to
      rags and blew it away with a breath; and how the astonished old judge on
      the bench spoke of her as “this marvelous child.”
     </p>
    <p>
      You remember all that. Then think what I felt, to see these false priests,
      here in the tribunal wherein Joan had fought a fourth lone fight in three
      years, deliberately twist that matter entirely around and try to make out
      that Joan haled the Paladin into court and pretended that he had promised
      to marry her, and was bent on making him do it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly there was no baseness that those people were ashamed to stoop to
      in their hunt for that friendless girl’s life. What they wanted to show
      was this—that she had committed the sin of relapsing from her vow
      and trying to violate it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan detailed the true history of the case, but lost her temper as she
      went along, and finished with some words for Cauchon which he remembers
      yet, whether he is fanning himself in the world he belongs in or has
      swindled his way into the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      The rest of this day and part of the next the court labored upon the old
      theme—the male attire. It was shabby work for those grave men to be
      engaged in; for they well knew one of Joan’s reasons for clinging to the
      male dress was, that soldiers of the guard were always present in her room
      whether she was asleep or awake, and that the male dress was a better
      protection for her modesty than the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      The court knew that one of Joan’s purposes had been the deliverance of the
      exiled Duke of Orleans, and they were curious to know how she had intended
      to manage it. Her plan was characteristically businesslike, and her
      statement of it as characteristically simple and straightforward:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I would have taken English prisoners enough in France for his ransom; and
      failing that, I would have invaded England and brought him out by force.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That was just her way. If a thing was to be done, it was love first, and
      hammer and tongs to follow; but no shilly-shallying between. She added
      with a little sigh:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If I had had my freedom three years, I would have delivered him.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Have you the permission of your Voices to break out of prison whenever
      you can?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I have asked their leave several times, but they have not given it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I think it is as I have said, she expected the deliverance of death, and
      within the prison walls, before the three months should expire.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Would you escape if you saw the doors open?”
     </p>
    <p>
      She spoke up frankly and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes—for I should see in that the permission of Our Lord. God helps
      who help themselves, the proverb says. But except I thought I had
      permission, I would not go.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Now, then, at this point, something occurred which convinces me, every
      time I think of it—and it struck me so at the time—that for a
      moment, at least, her hopes wandered to the King, and put into her mind
      the same notion about her deliverance which Noel and I had settled upon—a
      rescue by her old soldiers. I think the idea of the rescue did occur to
      her, but only as a passing thought, and that it quickly passed away.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some remark of the Bishop of Beauvais moved her to remind him once more
      that he was an unfair judge, and had no right to preside there, and that
      he was putting himself in great danger.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What danger?” he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I do not know. St. Catherine has promised me help, but I do not know the
      form of it. I do not know whether I am to be delivered from this prison or
      whether when you sent me to the scaffold there will happen a trouble by
      which I shall be set free. Without much thought as to this matter, I am of
      the opinion that it may be one or the other.” After a pause she added
      these words, memorable forever—words whose meaning she may have
      miscaught, misunderstood; as to that we can never know; words which she
      may have rightly understood, as to that, also, we can never know; but
      words whose mystery fell away from them many a year ago and revealed their
      meaning to all the world:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But what my Voices have said clearest is, that I shall be delivered by a
      great victory.” She paused, my heart was beating fast, for to me that
      great victory meant the sudden bursting in of our old soldiers with the
      war-cry and clash of steel at the last moment and the carrying off of Joan
      of Arc in triumph. But, oh, that thought had such a short life! For now
      she raised her head and finished, with those solemn words which men still
      so often quote and dwell upon—words which filled me with fear, they
      sounded so like a prediction. “And always they say ‘Submit to whatever
      comes; do not grieve for your martyrdom; from it you will ascend into the
      Kingdom of Paradise.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Was she thinking of fire and the stake? I think not. I thought of it
      myself, but I believe she was only thinking of this slow and cruel
      martyrdom of chains and captivity and insult. Surely, martyrdom was the
      right name for it.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was Jean de la Fontaine who was asking the questions. He was willing to
      make the most he could out of what she had said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “As the Voices have told you you are going to Paradise, you feel certain
      that that will happen and that you will not be damned in hell. Is that
      so?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I believe what they told me. I know that I shall be saved.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is a weighty answer.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “To me the knowledge that I shall be saved is a great treasure.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Do you think that after that revelation you could be able to commit
      mortal sin?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “As to that, I do not know. My hope for salvation is in holding fast to my
      oath to keep by body and my soul pure.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Since you know you are to be saved, do you think it necessary to go to
      confession?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The snare was ingeniously devised, but Joan’s simple and humble answer
      left it empty:
    </p>
    <p>
      “One cannot keep his conscience too clean.”
     </p>
    <p>
      We were now arriving at the last day of this new trial. Joan had come
      through the ordeal well. It had been a long and wearisome struggle for all
      concerned. All ways had been tried to convict the accused, and all had
      failed, thus far. The inquisitors were thoroughly vexed and dissatisfied.
    </p>
    <p>
      However, they resolved to make one more effort, put in one more day’s
      work. This was done—March 17th. Early in the sitting a notable trap
      was set for Joan:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Will you submit to the determination of the Church all your words and
      deeds, whether good or bad?”
     </p>
    <p>
      That was well planned. Joan was in imminent peril now. If she should
      heedlessly say yes, it would put her mission itself upon trial, and one
      would know how to decide its source and character promptly. If she should
      say no, she would render herself chargeable with the crime of heresy.
    </p>
    <p>
      But she was equal to the occasion. She drew a distinct line of separation
      between the Church’s authority over her as a subject member, and the
      matter of her mission. She said she loved the Church and was ready to
      support the Christian faith with all her strength; but as to the works
      done under her mission, those must be judged by God alone, who had
      commanded them to be done.
    </p>
    <p>
      The judge still insisted that she submit them to the decision of the
      Church. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I will submit them to Our Lord who sent me. It would seem to me that He
      and His Church are one, and that there should be no difficulty about this
      matter.” Then she turned upon the judge and said, “Why do you make a
      difficulty when there is no room for any?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then Jean de la Fontaine corrected her notion that there was but one
      Church. There were two—the Church Triumphant, which is God, the
      saints, the angels, and the redeemed, and has its seat in heaven; and the
      Church Militant, which is our Holy Father the Pope, Vicar of God, the
      prelates, the clergy and all good Christians and Catholics, the which
      Church has its seat in the earth, is governed by the Holy Spirit, and
      cannot err. “Will you not submit those matters to the Church Militant?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I am come to the King of France from the Church Triumphant on high by its
      commandant, and to that Church I will submit all those things which I have
      done. For the Church Militant I have no other answer now.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The court took note of this straitly worded refusal, and would hope to get
      profit out of it; but the matter was dropped for the present, and a long
      chase was then made over the old hunting-ground—the fairies, the
      visions, the male attire, and all that.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the afternoon the satanic Bishop himself took the chair and presided
      over the closing scenes of the trial. Along toward the finish, this
      question was asked by one of the judges:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You have said to my lord the Bishop that you would answer him as you
      would answer before our Holy Father the Pope, and yet there are several
      questions which you continually refuse to answer. Would you not answer the
      Pope more fully than you have answered before my lord of Beauvais? Would
      you not feel obliged to answer the Pope, who is the Vicar of God, more
      fully?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Now a thunder-clap fell out of a clear sky:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Take me to the Pope. I will answer to everything that I ought to.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It made the Bishop’s purple face fairly blanch with consternation. If Joan
      had only known, if she had only know! She had lodged a mine under this
      black conspiracy able to blow the Bishop’s schemes to the four winds of
      heaven, and she didn’t know it. She had made that speech by mere instinct,
      not suspecting what tremendous forces were hidden in it, and there was
      none to tell her what she had done. I knew, and Manchon knew; and if she
      had known how to read writing we could have hoped to get the knowledge to
      her somehow; but speech was the only way, and none was allowed to approach
      her near enough for that. So there she sat, once more Joan of Arc the
      Victorious, but all unconscious of it. She was miserably worn and tired,
      by the long day’s struggle and by illness, or she must have noticed the
      effect of that speech and divined the reason of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      She had made many master-strokes, but this was the master-stroke. It was
      an appeal to Rome. It was her clear right; and if she had persisted in it
      Cauchon’s plot would have tumbled about his ears like a house of cards,
      and he would have gone from that place the worst-beaten man of the
      century. He was daring, but he was not daring enough to stand up against
      that demand if Joan had urged it. But no, she was ignorant, poor thing,
      and did not know what a blow she had struck for life and liberty.
    </p>
    <p>
      France was not the Church. Rome had no interest in the destruction of this
      messenger of God.
    </p>
    <p>
      Rome would have given her a fair trial, and that was all that her cause
      needed. From that trial she would have gone forth free, and honored, and
      blessed.
    </p>
    <p>
      But it was not so fated. Cauchon at once diverted the questions to other
      matters and hurried the trial quickly to an end.
    </p>
    <p>
      As Joan moved feebly away, dragging her chains, I felt stunned and dazed,
      and kept saying to myself, “Such a little while ago she said the saving
      word and could have gone free; and now, there she goes to her death; yes,
      it is to her death, I know it, I feel it. They will double the guards;
      they will never let any come near her now between this and her
      condemnation, lest she get a hint and speak that word again. This is the
      bitterest day that has come to me in all this miserable time.”
     </p>
    <h3>
      13 The Third Trial Fails
    </h3>

    <p>
      SO THE SECOND trial in the prison was over. Over, and no definite result.
      The character of it I have described to you. It was baser in one
      particular than the previous one; for this time the charges had not been
      communicated to Joan, therefore she had been obliged to fight in the dark.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was no opportunity to do any thinking beforehand; there was no
      foreseeing what traps might be set, and no way to prepare for them. Truly
      it was a shabby advantage to take of a girl situated as this one was. One
      day, during the course of it, an able lawyer of Normandy, Maetre Lohier,
      happened to be in Rouen, and I will give you his opinion of that trial, so
      that you may see that I have been honest with you, and that my
      partisanship has not made me deceive you as to its unfair and illegal
      character. Cauchon showed Lohier the proces and asked his opinion about
      the trial. Now this was the opinion which he gave to Cauchon. He said that
      the whole thing was null and void; for these reasons: 1, because the trial
      was secret, and full freedom of speech and action on the part of those
      present not possible; 2, because the trial touched the honor of the King
      of France, yet he was not summoned to defend himself, nor any one
      appointed to represent him; 3, because the charges against the prisoner
      were not communicated to her; 4, because the accused, although young and
      simple, had been forced to defend her cause without help of counsel,
      notwithstanding she had so much at stake.
    </p>
    <p>
      Did that please Bishop Cauchon? It did not. He burst out upon Lohier with
      the most savage cursings, and swore he would have him drowned. Lohier
      escaped from Rouen and got out of France with all speed, and so saved his
      life.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, as I have said, the second trial was over, without definite result.
      But Cauchon did not give up. He could trump up another. And still another
      and another, if necessary. He had the half-promise of an enormous prize—the
      Archbishopric of Rouen—if he should succeed in burning the body and
      damning to hell the soul of this young girl who had never done him any
      harm; and such a prize as that, to a man like the Bishop of Beauvais, was
      worth the burning and damning of fifty harmless girls, let alone one.
    </p>
    <p>
      So he set to work again straight off next day; and with high confidence,
      too, intimating with brutal cheerfulness that he should succeed this time.
      It took him and the other scavengers nine days to dig matter enough out of
      Joan’s testimony and their own inventions to build up the new mass of
      charges. And it was a formidable mass indeed, for it numbered sixty-six
      articles.
    </p>
    <p>
      This huge document was carried to the castle the next day, March 27th; and
      there, before a dozen carefully selected judges, the new trial was begun.
    </p>
    <p>
      Opinions were taken, and the tribunal decided that Joan should hear the
      articles read this time.
    </p>
    <p>
      Maybe that was on account of Lohier’s remark upon that head; or maybe it
      was hoped that the reading would kill the prisoner with fatigue—for,
      as it turned out, this reading occupied several days. It was also decided
      that Joan should be required to answer squarely to every article, and that
      if she refused she should be considered convicted. You see, Cauchon was
      managing to narrow her chances more and more all the time; he was drawing
      the toils closer and closer.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan was brought in, and the Bishop of Beauvais opened with a speech to
      her which ought to have made even himself blush, so laden it was with
      hypocrisy and lies. He said that this court was composed of holy and pious
      churchmen whose hearts were full of benevolence and compassion toward her,
      and that they had no wish to hurt her body, but only a desire to instruct
      her and lead her into the way of truth and salvation.
    </p>
    <p>
      Why, this man was born a devil; now think of his describing himself and
      those hardened slaves of his in such language as that.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet, worse was to come. For now having in mind another of Lovier’s
      hints, he had the cold effrontery to make to Joan a proposition which, I
      think, will surprise you when you hear it. He said that this court,
      recognizing her untaught estate and her inability to deal with the complex
      and difficult matters which were about to be considered, had determined,
      out of their pity and their mercifulness, to allow her to choose one or
      more persons out of their own number to help her with counsel and advice!
    </p>
    <p>
      Think of that—a court made up of Loyseleur and his breed of
      reptiles. It was granting leave to a lamb to ask help of a wolf. Joan
      looked up to see if he was serious, and perceiving that he was at least
      pretending to be, she declined, of course.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Bishop was not expecting any other reply. He had made a show of
      fairness and could have it entered on the minutes, therefore he was
      satisfied.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he commanded Joan to answer straitly to every accusation; and
      threatened to cut her off from the Church if she failed to do that or
      delayed her answers beyond a given length of time.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he was narrowing her chances down, step by step.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thomas de Courcelles began the reading of that interminable document,
      article by article. Joan answered to each article in its turn; sometimes
      merely denying its truth, sometimes by saying her answer would be found in
      the records of the previous trials.
    </p>
    <p>
      What a strange document that was, and what an exhibition and exposure of
      the heart of man, the one creature authorized to boast that he is made in
      the image of God. To know Joan of Arc was to know one who was wholly
      noble, pure, truthful, brave, compassionate, generous, pious, unselfish,
      modest, blameless as the very flowers in the fields—a nature fine
      and beautiful, a character supremely great. To know her from that document
      would be to know her as the exact reverse of all that. Nothing that she
      was appears in it, everything that she was not appears there in detail.
    </p>
    <p>
      Consider some of the things it charges against her, and remember who it is
      it is speaking of. It calls her a sorceress, a false prophet, an invoker
      and companion of evil spirits, a dealer in magic, a person ignorant of the
      Catholic faith, a schismatic; she is sacrilegious, an idolater, an
      apostate, a blasphemer of God and His saints, scandalous, seditious, a
      disturber of the peace; she incites men to war, and to the spilling of
      human blood; she discards the decencies and proprieties of her sex,
      irreverently assuming the dress of a man and the vocation of a soldier;
      she beguiles both princes and people; she usurps divine honors, and has
      caused herself to be adored and venerated, offering her hands and her
      vestments to be kissed.
    </p>
    <p>
      There it is—every fact of her life distorted, perverted, reversed.
      As a child she had loved the fairies, she had spoken a pitying word for
      them when they were banished from their home, she had played under their
      tree and around their fountain—hence she was a comrade of evil
      spirits.
    </p>
    <p>
      She had lifted France out of the mud and moved her to strike for freedom,
      and led her to victory after victory—hence she was a disturber of
      the peace—as indeed she was, and a provoker of war—as indeed
      she was again! and France will be proud of it and grateful for it for many
      a century to come. And she had been adored—as if she could help
      that, poor thing, or was in any way to blame for it. The cowed veteran and
      the wavering recruit had drunk the spirit of war from her eyes and touched
      her sword with theirs and moved forward invincible—hence she was a
      sorceress.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so the document went on, detail by detail, turning these waters of
      life to poison, this gold to dross, these proofs of a noble and beautiful
      life to evidences of a foul and odious one.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of course, the sixty-six articles were just a rehash of the things which
      had come up in the course of the previous trials, so I will touch upon
      this new trial but lightly. In fact, Joan went but little into detail
      herself, usually merely saying, “That is not true—passez outre”; or,
      “I have answered that before—let the clerk read it in his record,”
       or saying some other brief thing.
    </p>
    <p>
      She refused to have her mission examined and tried by the earthly Church.
      The refusal was taken note of.
    </p>
    <p>
      She denied the accusation of idolatry and that she had sought men’s
      homage. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If any kissed my hands and my vestments it was not by my desire, and I
      did what I could to prevent it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She had the pluck to say to that deadly tribunal that she did not know the
      fairies to be evil beings. She knew it was a perilous thing to say, but it
      was not in her nature to speak anything but the truth when she spoke at
      all. Danger had no weight with her in such things. Note was taken of her
      remark.
    </p>
    <p>
      She refused, as always before, when asked if she would put off the male
      attire if she were given permission to commune. And she added this:
    </p>
    <p>
      “When one receives the sacrament, the manner of his dress is a small thing
      and of no value in the eyes of Our Lord.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was charge with being so stubborn in clinging to her male dress that
      she would not lay it off even to get the blessed privilege of hearing
      mass. She spoke out with spirit and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I would rather die than be untrue to my oath to God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was reproached with doing man’s work in the wars and thus deserting
      the industries proper to her sex. She answered, with some little touch of
      soldierly disdain:
    </p>
    <p>
      “As to the matter of women’s work, there’s plenty to do it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was always a comfort to me to see the soldier spirit crop up in her.
      While that remained in her she would be Joan of Arc, and able to look
      trouble and fate in the face.
    </p>
    <p>
      “It appears that this mission of yours which you claim you had from God,
      was to make war and pour out human blood.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan replied quite simply, contenting herself with explaining that war was
      not her first move, but her second:
    </p>
    <p>
      “To begin with, I demanded that peace should be made. If it was refused,
      then I would fight.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The judge mixed the Burgundians and English together in speaking of the
      enemy which Joan had come to make war upon. But she showed that she made a
      distinction between them by act and word, the Burgundians being Frenchmen
      and therefore entitled to less brusque treatment than the English. She
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “As to the Duke of Burgundy, I required of him, both by letters and by his
      ambassadors, that he make peace with the King. As to the English, the only
      peace for them was that they leave the country and go home.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she said that even with the English she had shown a pacific
      disposition, since she had warned them away by proclamation before
      attacking them.
    </p>
    <p>
      “If they had listened to me,” said she, “they would have done wisely.” At
      this point she uttered her prophecy again, saying with emphasis, “Before
      seven years they will see it themselves.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then they presently began to pester her again about her male costume, and
      tried to persuade her to voluntarily promise to discard it. I was never
      deep, so I think it no wonder that I was puzzled by their persistency in
      what seemed a thing of no consequence, and could not make out what their
      reason could be. But we all know now. We all know now that it was another
      of their treacherous projects. Yes, if they could but succeed in getting
      her to formally discard it they could play a game upon her which would
      quickly destroy her. So they kept at their evil work until at last she
      broke out and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Peace! Without the permission of God I will not lay it off though you cut
      off my head!”
     </p>
    <p>
      At one point she corrected the proces verbal, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It makes me say that everything which I have done was done by the counsel
      of Our Lord. I did not say that, I said ‘all which I have well done.’”
     </p>
    <p>
      Doubt was cast upon the authenticity of her mission because of the
      ignorance and simplicity of the messenger chosen. Joan smiled at that. She
      could have reminded these people that Our Lord, who is no respecter of
      persons, had chosen the lowly for his high purposes even oftener than he
      had chosen bishops and cardinals; but she phrased her rebuke in simpler
      terms:
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is the prerogative of Our Lord to choose His instruments where He
      will.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was asked what form of prayer she used in invoking counsel from on
      high. She said the form was brief and simple; then she lifted her pallid
      face and repeated it, clasping her chained hands:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Most dear God, in honor of your holy passion I beseech you, if you love
      me, that you will reveal to me what I am to answer to these churchmen. As
      concerns my dress, I know by what command I have put it on, but I know not
      in what manner I am to lay it off. I pray you tell me what to do.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was charged with having dared, against the precepts of God and His
      saints, to assume empire over men and make herself Commander-in-Chief.
      That touched the soldier in her. She had a deep reverence for priests, but
      the soldier in her had but small reverence for a priest’s opinions about
      war; so, in her answer to this charge she did not condescend to go into
      any explanations or excuses, but delivered herself with bland indifference
      and military brevity.
    </p>
    <p>
      “If I was Commander-in-Chief, it was to thrash the English.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Death was staring her in the face here all the time, but no matter; she
      dearly loved to make these English-hearted Frenchmen squirm, and whenever
      they gave her an opening she was prompt to jab her sting into it. She got
      great refreshment out of these little episodes. Her days were a desert;
      these were the oases in it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her being in the wars with men was charged against her as an indelicacy.
      She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I had a woman with me when I could—in towns and lodgings. In the
      field I always slept in my armor.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That she and her family had been ennobled by the King was charged against
      her as evidence that the source of her deeds were sordid self-seeking. She
      answered that she had not asked this grace of the King; it was his own
      act.
    </p>
    <p>
      This third trial was ended at last. And once again there was no definite
      result.
    </p>
    <p>
      Possibly a fourth trial might succeed in defeating this apparently
      unconquerable girl. So the malignant Bishop set himself to work to plan
      it.
    </p>
    <p>
      He appointed a commission to reduce the substance of the sixty-six
      articles to twelve compact lies, as a basis for the new attempt. This was
      done. It took several days.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meantime Cauchon went to Joan’s cell one day, with Manchon and two of the
      judges, Isambard de la Pierre and Martin Ladvenue, to see if he could not
      manage somehow to beguile Joan into submitting her mission to the
      examination and decision of the Church Militant—that is to say, to
      that part of the Church Militant which was represented by himself and his
      creatures.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan once more positively refused. Isambard de la Pierre had a heart in
      his body, and he so pitied this persecuted poor girl that he ventured to
      do a very daring thing; for he asked her if she would be willing to have
      her case go before the Council of Basel, and said it contained as many
      priests of her party as of the English party.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan cried out that she would gladly go before so fairly constructed a
      tribunal as that; but before Isambard could say another word Cauchon
      turned savagely upon him and exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Shut up, in the devil’s name!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then Manchon ventured to do a brave thing, too, though he did it in great
      fear for his life. He asked Cauchon if he should enter Joan’s submission
      to the Council of Basel upon the minutes.
    </p>
    <p>
      “No! It is not necessary.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah,” said poor Joan, reproachfully, “you set down everything that is
      against me, but you will not set down what is for me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was piteous. It would have touched the heart of a brute. But Cauchon
      was more than that.
    </p>
    <h3>
      14 Joan Struggles with Her Twelve Lies
    </h3>
    <p>
      WE WERE now in the first days of April. Joan was ill. She had fallen ill
      the 29th of March, the day after the close of the third trial, and was
      growing worse when the scene which I have just described occurred in her
      cell. It was just like Cauchon to go there and try to get some advantage
      out of her weakened state.
    </p>
    <p>
      Let us note some of the particulars in the new indictment—the Twelve
      Lies.
    </p>
    <p>
      Part of the first one says Joan asserts that she has found her salvation.
      She never said anything of the kind. It also says she refuses to submit
      herself to the Church. Not true. She was willing to submit all her acts to
      this Rouen tribunal except those done by the command of God in fulfilment
      of her mission. Those she reserved for the judgment of God. She refused to
      recognize Cauchon and his serfs as the Church, but was willing to go
      before the Pope or the Council of Basel.
    </p>
    <p>
      A clause of another of the Twelve says she admits having threatened with
      death those who would not obey her. Distinctly false. Another clause says
      she declares that all she has done has been done by command of God. What
      she really said was, all that she had done well—a correction made by
      herself as you have already seen.
    </p>
    <p>
      Another of the Twelve says she claims that she has never committed any
      sin. She never made any such claim.
    </p>
    <p>
      Another makes the wearing of the male dress a sin. If it was, she had high
      Catholic authority for committing it—that of the Archbishop of
      Rheims and the tribunal of Poitiers.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Tenth Article was resentful against her for “pretending” that St.
      Catherine and St.
    </p>
    <p>
      Marguerite spoke French and not English, and were French in their
      politics.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Twelve were to be submitted first to the learned doctors of theology
      of the University of Paris for approval. They were copied out and ready by
      the night of April 4th. Then Manchon did another bold thing: he wrote in
      the margin that many of the Twelve put statements in Joan’s mouth which
      were the exact opposite of what she had said. That fact would not be
      considered important by the University of Paris, and would not influence
      its decision or stir its humanity, in case it had any—which it
      hadn’t when acting in a political capacity, as at present—but it was
      a brave thing for that good Manchon to do, all the same.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Twelve were sent to Paris next day, April 5th. That afternoon there
      was a great tumult in Rouen, and excited crowds were flocking through all
      the chief streets, chattering and seeking for news; for a report had gone
      abroad that Joan of Arc was sick until death. In truth, these long seances
      had worn her out, and she was ill indeed. The heads of the English party
      were in a state of consternation; for if Joan should die uncondemned by
      the Church and go to the grave unsmirched, the pity and the love of the
      people would turn her wrongs and sufferings and death into a holy
      martyrdom, and she would be even a mightier power in France dead than she
      had been when alive.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Earl of Warwick and the English Cardinal (Winchester) hurried to the
      castle and sent messengers flying for physicians. Warwick was a hard man,
      a rude, coarse man, a man without compassion. There lay the sick girl
      stretched in her chains in her iron cage—not an object to move man
      to ungentle speech, one would think; yet Warwick spoke right out in her
      hearing and said to the physicians:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Mind you take good care of her. The King of England has no mind to have
      her die a natural death. She is dear to him, for he bought her dear, and
      he does not want her to die, save at the stake. Now then, mind you cure
      her.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The doctors asked Joan what had made her ill. She said the Bishop of
      Beauvais had sent her a fish and she thought it was that.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then Jean d’Estivet burst out on her, and called her names and abused her.
      He understood Joan to be charging the Bishop with poisoning her, you see;
      and that was not pleasing to him, for he was one of Cauchon’s most loving
      and conscienceless slaves, and it outraged him to have Joan injure his
      master in the eyes of these great English chiefs, these being men who
      could ruin Cauchon and would promptly do it if they got the conviction
      that he was capable of saving Joan from the stake by poisoning her and
      thus cheating the English out of all the real value gainable by her
      purchase from the Duke of Burgundy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan had a high fever, and the doctors proposed to bleed her. Warwick
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Be careful about that; she is smart and is capable of killing herself.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He meant that to escape the stake she might undo the bandage and let
      herself bleed to death.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the doctors bled her anyway, and then she was better.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not for long, though. Jean d’Estivet could not hold still, he was so
      worried and angry about the suspicion of poisoning which Joan had hinted
      at; so he came back in the evening and stormed at her till he brought the
      fever all back again.
    </p>
    <p>
      When Warwick heard of this he was in a fine temper, you may be sure, for
      here was his prey threatening to escape again, and all through the
      over-zeal of this meddling fool. Warwick gave D’Estivet a quite admirable
      cursing—admirable as to strength, I mean, for it was said by persons
      of culture that the art of it was not good—and after that the
      meddler kept still.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan remained ill more than two weeks; then she grew better. She was still
      very weak, but she could bear a little persecution now without much danger
      to her life. It seemed to Cauchon a good time to furnish it. So he called
      together some of his doctors of theology and went to her dungeon. Manchon
      and I went along to keep the record—that is, to set down what might
      be useful to Cauchon, and leave out the rest.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sight of Joan gave me a shock. Why, she was but a shadow! It was
      difficult for me to realize that this frail little creature with the sad
      face and drooping form was the same Joan of Arc that I had so often seen,
      all fire and enthusiasm, charging through a hail of death and the
      lightning and thunder of the guns at the head of her battalions. It wrung
      my heart to see her looking like this.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Cauchon was not touched. He made another of those conscienceless
      speeches of his, all dripping with hypocrisy and guile. He told Joan that
      among her answers had been some which had seemed to endanger religion; and
      as she was ignorant and without knowledge of the Scriptures, he had
      brought some good and wise men to instruct her, if she desired it. Said
      he, “We are churchmen, and disposed by our good will as well as by our
      vocation to procure for you the salvation of your soul and your body, in
      every way in our power, just as we would do the like for our nearest kin
      or for ourselves. In this we but follow the example of Holy Church, who
      never closes the refuge of her bosom against any that are willing to
      return.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan thanked him for these sayings and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I seem to be in danger of death from this malady; if it be the pleasure
      of God that I die here, I beg that I may be heard in confession and also
      receive my Saviour; and that I may be buried in consecrated ground.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon thought he saw his opportunity at last; this weakened body had the
      fear of an unblessed death before it and the pains of hell to follow. This
      stubborn spirit would surrender now. So he spoke out and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Then if you want the Sacraments, you must do as all good Catholics do,
      and submit to the Church.”
     </p>
    <p>
      He was eager for her answer; but when it came there was no surrender in
      it, she still stood to her guns. She turned her head away and said
      wearily:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have nothing more to say.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon’s temper was stirred, and he raised his voice threateningly and
      said that the more she was in danger of death the more she ought to amend
      her life; and again he refused the things she begged for unless she would
      submit to the Church. Joan said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If I die in this prison I beg you to have me buried in holy ground; if
      you will not, I cast myself upon my Saviour.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was some more conversation of the like sort, then Cauchon demanded
      again, and imperiously, that she submit herself and all her deeds to the
      Church. His threatening and storming went for nothing. That body was weak,
      but the spirit in it was the spirit of Joan of Arc; and out of that came
      the steadfast answer which these people were already so familiar with and
      detested so sincerely:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Let come what may. I will neither do nor say any otherwise than I have
      said already in your tribunals.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then the good theologians took turn about and worried her with reasonings
      and arguments and Scriptures; and always they held the lure of the
      Sacraments before her famishing soul, and tried to bribe her with them to
      surrender her mission to the Church’s judgment—that is to their
      judgment—as if they were the Church! But it availed nothing. I could
      have told them that beforehand, if they had asked me. But they never asked
      me anything; I was too humble a creature for their notice.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then the interview closed with a threat; a threat of fearful import; a
      threat calculated to make a Catholic Christian feel as if the ground were
      sinking from under him:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The Church calls upon you to submit; disobey, and she will abandon you as
      if you were a pagan!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Think of being abandoned by the Church!—that August Power in whose
      hands is lodged the fate of the human race; whose scepter stretches beyond
      the furthest constellation that twinkles in the sky; whose authority is
      over millions that live and over the billions that wait trembling in
      purgatory for ransom or doom; whose smile opens the gates of heaven to
      you, whose frown delivers you to the fires of everlasting hell; a Power
      whose dominion overshadows and belittles the pomps and shows of a village.
      To be abandoned by one’s King—yes, that is death, and death is much;
      but to be abandoned by Rome, to be abandoned by the Church! Ah, death is
      nothing to that, for that is consignment to endless life—and such a
      life!
    </p>
    <p>
      I could see the red waves tossing in that shoreless lake of fire, I could
      see the black myriads of the damned rise out of them and struggle and sink
      and rise again; and I knew that Joan was seeing what I saw, while she
      paused musing; and I believed that she must yield now, and in truth I
      hoped she would, for these men were able to make the threat good and
      deliver her over to eternal suffering, and I knew that it was in their
      natures to do it.
    </p>
    <p>
      But I was foolish to think that thought and hope that hope. Joan of Arc
      was not made as others are made. Fidelity to principle, fidelity to truth,
      fidelity to her word, all these were in her bone and in her flesh—they
      were parts of her. She could not change, she could not cast them out. She
      was the very genius of Fidelity; she was Steadfastness incarnated. Where
      she had taken her stand and planted her foot, there she would abide; hell
      itself could not move her from that place.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her Voices had not given her permission to make the sort of submission
      that was required, therefore she would stand fast. She would wait, in
      perfect obedience, let come what might.
    </p>
    <p>
      My heart was like lead in my body when I went out from that dungeon; but
      she—she was serene, she was not troubled. She had done what she
      believed to be her duty, and that was sufficient; the consequences were
      not her affair. The last thing she said that time was full of this
      serenity, full of contented repose:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I am a good Christian born and baptized, and a good Christian I will
      die.”
     </p>
    <h3>
      15 Undaunted by Threat of Burning
    </h3>
    <p>
      TWO WEEKS went by; the second of May was come, the chill was departed out
      of the air, the wild flowers were springing in the glades and glens, the
      birds were piping in the woods, all nature was brilliant with sunshine,
      all spirits were renewed and refreshed, all hearts glad, the world was
      alive with hope and cheer, the plain beyond the Seine stretched away soft
      and rich and green, the river was limpid and lovely, the leafy islands
      were dainty to see, and flung still daintier reflections of themselves
      upon the shining water; and from the tall bluffs above the bridge Rouen
      was become again a delight to the eye, the most exquisite and satisfying
      picture of a town that nestles under the arch of heaven anywhere.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I say that all hearts were glad and hopeful, I mean it in a general
      sense. There were exceptions—we who were the friends of Joan of Arc,
      also Joan of Arc herself, that poor girl shut up there in that frowning
      stretch of mighty walls and towers: brooding in darkness, so close to the
      flooding downpour of sunshine yet so impossibly far away from it; so
      longing for any little glimpse of it, yet so implacably denied it by those
      wolves in the black gowns who were plotting her death and the blackening
      of her good name.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon was ready to go on with his miserable work. He had a new scheme to
      try now. He would see what persuasion could do—argument, eloquence,
      poured out upon the incorrigible captive from the mouth of a trained
      expert. That was his plan. But the reading of the Twelve Articles to her
      was not a part of it. No, even Cauchon was ashamed to lay that monstrosity
      before her; even he had a remnant of shame in him, away down deep, a
      million fathoms deep, and that remnant asserted itself now and prevailed.
    </p>
    <p>
      On this fair second of May, then, the black company gathered itself
      together in the spacious chamber at the end of the great hall of the
      castle—the Bishop of Beauvais on his throne, and sixty-two minor
      judges massed before him, with the guards and recorders at their stations
      and the orator at his desk.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then we heard the far clank of chains, and presently Joan entered with her
      keepers and took her seat upon her isolated bench. She was looking well
      now, and most fair and beautiful after her fortnight’s rest from wordy
      persecution.
    </p>
    <p>
      She glanced about and noted the orator. Doubtless she divined the
      situation.
    </p>
    <p>
      The orator had written his speech all out, and had it in his hand, though
      he held it back of him out of sight. It was so thick that it resembled a
      book. He began flowing, but in the midst of a flowery period his memory
      failed him and he had to snatch a furtive glance at his manuscript—which
      much injured the effect. Again this happened, and then a third time. The
      poor man’s face was red with embarrassment, the whole great house was
      pitying him, which made the matter worse; then Joan dropped in a remark
      which completed the trouble. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Read your book—and then I will answer you!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Why, it was almost cruel the way those moldy veterans laughed; and as for
      the orator, he looked so flustered and helpless that almost anybody would
      have pitied him, and I had difficulty to keep from doing it myself. Yes,
      Joan was feeling very well after her rest, and the native mischief that
      was in her lay near the surface. It did not show when she made the remark,
      but I knew it was close in there back of the words.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the orator had gotten back his composure he did a wise thing; for he
      followed Joan’s advice: he made no more attempts at sham impromptu
      oratory, but read his speech straight from his “book.” In the speech he
      compressed the Twelve Articles into six, and made these his text.
    </p>
    <p>
      Every now and then he stopped and asked questions, and Joan replied. The
      nature of the Church Militant was explained, and once more Joan was asked
      to submit herself to it.
    </p>
    <p>
      She gave her usual answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then she was asked:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you believe the Church can err?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I believe it cannot err; but for those deeds and words of mine which were
      done and uttered by command of God, I will answer to Him alone.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Will you say that you have no judge upon earth? Is not our Holy Father
      the Pope your judge?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I will say nothing about it. I have a good Master who is our Lord, and to
      Him I will submit all.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then came these terrible words:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If you do not submit to the Church you will be pronounced a heretic by
      these judges here present and burned at the stake!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Ah, that would have smitten you or me dead with fright, but it only roused
      the lion heart of Joan of Arc, and in her answer rang that martial note
      which had used to stir her soldiers like a bugle-call:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I will not say otherwise than I have said already; and if I saw the fire
      before me I would say it again!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was uplifting to hear her battle-voice once more and see the
      battle-light burn in her eye. Many there were stirred; every man that was
      a man was stirred, whether friend or foe; and Manchon risked his life
      again, good soul, for he wrote in the margin of the record in good plain
      letters these brave words: “Superba responsio!” and there they have
      remained these sixty years, and there you may read them to this day.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Superba responsio!” Yes, it was just that. For this “superb answer” came
      from the lips of a girl of nineteen with death and hell staring her in the
      face.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of course, the matter of the male attire was gone over again; and as usual
      at wearisome length; also, as usual, the customary bribe was offered: if
      she would discard that dress voluntarily they would let her hear mass. But
      she answered as she had often answered before:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I will go in a woman’s robe to all services of the Church if I may be
      permitted, but I will resume the other dress when I return to my cell.”
     </p>
    <p>
      They set several traps for her in a tentative form; that is to say, they
      placed suppositious propositions before her and cunningly tried to commit
      her to one end of the propositions without committing themselves to the
      other. But she always saw the game and spoiled it. The trap was in this
      form:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Would you be willing to do so and so if we should give you leave?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Her answer was always in this form or to this effect:
    </p>
    <p>
      “When you give me leave, then you will know.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Yes, Joan was at her best that second of May. She had all her wits about
      her, and they could not catch her anywhere. It was a long, long session,
      and all the old ground was fought over again, foot by foot, and the
      orator-expert worked all his persuasions, all his eloquence; but the
      result was the familiar one—a drawn battle, the sixty-two retiring
      upon their base, the solitary enemy holding her original position within
      her original lines.
    </p>
    <h3>
      16 Joan Stands Defiant Before the Rack
    </h3>
    <p>
      THE BRILLIANT weather, the heavenly weather, the bewitching weather made
      everybody’s heart to sing, as I have told you; yes, Rouen was feeling
      light-hearted and gay, and most willing and ready to break out and laugh
      upon the least occasion; and so when the news went around that the young
      girl in the tower had scored another defeat against Bishop Cauchon there
      was abundant laughter—abundant laughter among the citizens of both
      parties, for they all hated the Bishop. It is true, the English-hearted
      majority of the people wanted Joan burned, but that did not keep them from
      laughing at the man they hated. It would have been perilous for anybody to
      laugh at the English chiefs or at the majority of Cauchon’s assistant
      judges, but to laugh at Cauchon or D’Estivet and Loyseleur was safe—nobody
      would report it.
    </p>
    <p>
      The difference between Cauchon and cochon (1) was not noticeable in
      speech, and so there was plenty of opportunity for puns; the opportunities
      were not thrown away.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some of the jokes got well worn in the course of two or three months, from
      repeated use; for every time Cauchon started a new trial the folk said
      “The sow has littered (2) again”; and every time the trial failed they
      said it over again, with its other meaning, “The hog has made a mess of
      it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And so, on the third of May, Noel and I, drifting about the town, heard
      many a wide-mouthed lout let go his joke and his laugh, and then move to
      the next group, proud of his wit and happy, to work it off again:
    </p>
    <p>
      “’Od’s blood, the sow has littered five times, and five times has made a
      mess of it!”
     </p>
    <p>
      And now and then one was bold enough to say—but he said it softly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Sixty-three and the might of England against a girl, and she camps on the
      field five times!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon lived in the great palace of the Archbishop, and it was guarded by
      English soldiery; but no matter, there was never a dark night but the
      walls showed next morning that the rude joker had been there with his
      paint and brush. Yes, he had been there, and had smeared the sacred walls
      with pictures of hogs in all attitudes except flattering ones; hogs
      clothed in a Bishop’s vestments and wearing a Bishop’s miter irreverently
      cocked on the side of their heads.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon raged and cursed over his defeats and his impotence during seven
      says; then he conceived a new scheme. You shall see what it was; for you
      have not cruel hearts, and you would never guess it.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the ninth of May there was a summons, and Manchon and I got out
      materials together and started. But this time we were to go to one of the
      other towers—not the one which was Joan’s prison. It was round and
      grim and massive, and built of the plainest and thickest and solidest
      masonry—a dismal and forbidding structure. (3) We entered the
      circular room on the ground floor, and I saw what turned me sick—the
      instruments of torture and the executioners standing ready! Here you have
      the black heart of Cauchon at the blackest, here you have the proof that
      in his nature there was no such thing as pity. One wonders if he ever knew
      his mother or ever had a sister.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon was there, and the Vice-Inquisitor and the Abbot of St. Corneille;
      also six others, among them that false Loyseleur. The guards were in their
      places, the rack was there, and by it stood the executioner and his aids
      in their crimson hose and doublets, meet color for their bloody trade. The
      picture of Joan rose before me stretched upon the rack, her feet tied to
      one end of it, her wrists to the other, and those red giants turning the
      windlass and pulling her limbs out of their sockets. It seemed to me that
      I could hear the bones snap and the flesh tear apart, and I did not see
      how that body of anointed servants of the merciful Jesus could sit there
      and look so placid and indifferent.
    </p>
    <p>
      After a little, Joan arrived and was brought in. She saw the rack, she saw
      the attendants, and the same picture which I had been seeing must have
      risen in her mind; but do you think she quailed, do you think she
      shuddered? No, there was no sign of that sort. She straightened herself
      up, and there was a slight curl of scorn about her lip; but as for fear,
      she showed not a vestige of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      This was a memorable session, but it was the shortest one of all the list.
      When Joan had taken her seat a resume of her “crimes” was read to her.
      Then Cauchon made a solemn speech. It in he said that in the course of her
      several trials Joan had refused to answer some of the questions and had
      answered others with lies, but that now he was going to have the truth out
      of her, and the whole of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her manner was full of confidence this time; he was sure he had found a
      way at last to break this child’s stubborn spirit and make her beg and
      cry. He would score a victory this time and stop the mouths of the jokers
      of Rouen. You see, he was only just a man after all, and couldn’t stand
      ridicule any better than other people. He talked high, and his splotchy
      face lighted itself up with all the shifting tints and signs of evil
      pleasure and promised triumph—purple, yellow, red, green—they
      were all there, with sometimes the dull and spongy blue of a drowned man,
      the uncanniest of them all. And finally he burst out in a great passion
      and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There is the rack, and there are its ministers! You will reveal all now
      or be put to the torture.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Speak.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she made that great answer which will live forever; made it without
      fuss or bravado, and yet how fine and noble was the sound of it:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I will tell you nothing more than I have told you; no, not even if you
      tear the limbs from my body. And even if in my pain I did say something
      otherwise, I would always say afterward that it was the torture that spoke
      and not I.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was no crushing that spirit. You should have seen Cauchon. Defeated
      again, and he had not dreamed of such a thing. I heard it said the next
      day, around the town, that he had a full confession all written out, in
      his pocket and all ready for Joan to sign. I do not know that that was
      true, but it probably was, for her mark signed at the bottom of a
      confession would be the kind of evidence (for effect with the public)
      which Cauchon and his people were particularly value, you know.
    </p>
    <p>
      No, there was no crushing that spirit, and no beclouding that clear mind.
      Consider the depth, the wisdom of that answer, coming from an ignorant
      girl. Why, there were not six men in the world who had ever reflected that
      words forced out of a person by horrible tortures were not necessarily
      words of verity and truth, yet this unlettered peasant-girl put her finger
      upon that flaw with an unerring instinct. I had always supposed that
      torture brought out the truth—everybody supposed it; and when Joan
      came out with those simple common-sense words they seemed to flood the
      place with light. It was like a lightning-flash at midnight which suddenly
      reveals a fair valley sprinkled over with silver streams and gleaming
      villages and farmsteads where was only an impenetrable world of darkness
      before. Manchon stole a sidewise look at me, and his face was full of
      surprise; and there was the like to be seen in other faces there. Consider—they
      were old, and deeply cultured, yet here was a village maid able to teach
      them something which they had not known before. I heard one of them
      mutter:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Verily it is a wonderful creature. She has laid her hand upon an accepted
      truth that is as old as the world, and it has crumbled to dust and rubbish
      under her touch. Now whence got she that marvelous insight?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The judges laid their heads together and began to talk now. It was plain,
      from chance words which one caught now and then, that Cauchon and
      Loyseleur were insisting upon the application of the torture, and that
      most of the others were urgently objecting.
    </p>
    <p>
      Finally Cauchon broke out with a good deal of asperity in his voice and
      ordered Joan back to her dungeon. That was a happy surprise for me. I was
      not expecting that the Bishop would yield.
    </p>
    <p>
      When Manchon came home that night he said he had found out why the torture
      was not applied.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were two reasons. One was, a fear that Joan might die under the
      torture, which would not suit the English at all; the other was, that the
      torture would effect nothing if Joan was going to take back everything she
      said under its pains; and as to putting her mark to a confession, it was
      believed that not even the rack would ever make her do that.
    </p>
    <p>
      So all Rouen laughed again, and kept it up for three days, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “The sow has littered six times, and made six messes of it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And the palace walls got a new decoration—a mitered hog carrying a
      discarded rack home on its shoulder, and Loyseleur weeping in its wake.
      Many rewards were offered for the capture of these painters, but nobody
      applied. Even the English guard feigned blindness and would not see the
      artists at work.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Bishop’s anger was very high now. He could not reconcile himself to
      the idea of giving up the torture. It was the pleasantest idea he had
      invented yet, and he would not cast it by. So he called in some of his
      satellites on the twelfth, and urged the torture again. But it was a
      failure.
    </p>
    <p>
      With some, Joan’s speech had wrought an effect; others feared she might
      die under torture; others did not believe that any amount of suffering
      could make her put her mark to a lying confession. There were fourteen men
      present, including the Bishop. Eleven of them voted dead against the
      torture, and stood their ground in spite of Cauchon’s abuse. Two voted
      with the Bishop and insisted upon the torture. These two were Loyseleur
      and the orator—the man whom Joan had bidden to “read his book”—Thomas
      de Courcelles, the renowned pleader and master of eloquence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Age has taught me charity of speech; but it fails me when I think of those
      three names—Cauchon, Courcelles, Loyseleur.
    </p>
    <p>
      (1) Hog, pig.
    </p>
    <p>
      (2) Cochonner, to litter, to farrow; also, “to make a mess of”!
    </p>
    <p>
      (3) The lower half of it remains to-day just as it was then; the upper
      half is of a later date. — TRANSLATOR.
    </p>
    <h3>
      17 Supreme in Direst Peril
    </h3>

    <p>
      ANOTHER ten days’ wait. The great theologians of that treasury of all
      valuable knowledge and all wisdom, the University of Paris, were still
      weighing and considering and discussing the Twelve Lies.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had had but little to do these ten days, so I spent them mainly in walks
      about the town with Noel. But there was no pleasure in them, our spirits
      being so burdened with cares, and the outlook for Joan growing steadily
      darker and darker all the time. And then we naturally contrasted our
      circumstances with hers: this freedom and sunshine, with her darkness and
      chains; our comradeship, with her lonely estate; our alleviations of one
      sort and another, with her destitution in all. She was used to liberty,
      but now she had none; she was an out-of-door creature by nature and habit,
      but now she was shut up day and night in a steel cage like an animal; she
      was used to the light, but now she was always in a gloom where all objects
      about her were dim and spectral; she was used to the thousand various
      sounds which are the cheer and music of a busy life, but now she heard
      only the monotonous footfall of the sentry pacing his watch; she had been
      fond of talking with her mates, but now there was no one to talk to; she
      had had an easy laugh, but it was gone dumb now; she had been born for
      comradeship, and blithe and busy work, and all manner of joyous
      activities, but here were only dreariness, and leaden hours, and weary
      inaction, and brooding stillness, and thoughts that travel by day and
      night and night and day round and round in the same circle, and wear the
      brain and break the heart with weariness. It was death in life; yes, death
      in life, that is what it must have been. And there was another hard thing
      about it all. A young girl in trouble needs the soothing solace and
      support and sympathy of persons of her own sex, and the delicate offices
      and gentle ministries which only these can furnish; yet in all these
      months of gloomy captivity in her dungeon Joan never saw the face of a
      girl or a woman. Think how her heart would have leaped to see such a face.
    </p>
    <p>
      Consider. If you would realize how great Joan of Arc was, remember that it
      was out of such a place and such circumstances that she came week after
      week and month after month and confronted the master intellects of France
      single-handed, and baffled their cunningest schemes, defeated their ablest
      plans, detected and avoided their secretest traps and pitfalls, broke
      their lines, repelled their assaults, and camped on the field after every
      engagement; steadfast always, true to her faith and her ideals; defying
      torture, defying the stake, and answering threats of eternal death and the
      pains of hell with a simple “Let come what may, here I take my stand and
      will abide.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Yes, if you would realize how great was the soul, how profound the wisdom,
      and how luminous the intellect of Joan of Arc, you must study her there,
      where she fought out that long fight all alone—and not merely
      against the subtlest brains and deepest learning of France, but against
      the ignoble deceits, the meanest treacheries, and the hardest hearts to be
      found in any land, pagan or Christian.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was great in battle—we all know that; great in foresight; great
      in loyalty and patriotism; great in persuading discontented chiefs and
      reconciling conflicting interests and passions; great in the ability to
      discover merit and genius wherever it lay hidden; great in picturesque and
      eloquent speech; supremely great in the gift of firing the hearts of
      hopeless men and noble enthusiasms, the gift of turning hares into heroes,
      slaves and skulkers into battalions that march to death with songs on
      their lips. But all these are exalting activities; they keep hand and
      heart and brain keyed up to their work; there is the joy of achievement,
      the inspiration of stir and movement, the applause which hails success;
      the soul is overflowing with life and energy, the faculties are at white
      heat; weariness, despondency, inertia—these do not exist.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, Joan of Arc was great always, great everywhere, but she was greatest
      in the Rouen trials.
    </p>
    <p>
      There she rose above the limitations and infirmities of our human nature,
      and accomplished under blighting and unnerving and hopeless conditions all
      that her splendid equipment of moral and intellectual forces could have
      accomplished if they had been supplemented by the mighty helps of hope and
      cheer and light, the presence of friendly faces, and a fair and equal
      fight, with the great world looking on and wondering.
    </p>
    <h3>
      18 Condemned Yet Unafraid
    </h3>
    <p>
      TOWARD THE END of the ten-day interval the University of Paris rendered
      its decision concerning the Twelve Articles. By this finding, Joan was
      guilty upon all the counts: she must renounce her errors and make
      satisfaction, or be abandoned to the secular arm for punishment.
    </p>
    <p>
      The University’s mind was probably already made up before the Articles
      were laid before it; yet it took it from the fifth to the eighteenth to
      produce its verdict. I think the delay may have been caused by temporary
      difficulties concerning two points:
    </p>
    <p>
      1. As to who the fiends were who were represented in Joan’s Voices; 2. As
      to whether her saints spoke French only.
    </p>
    <p>
      You understand, the University decided emphatically that it was fiends who
      spoke in those Voices; it would need to prove that, and it did. It found
      out who those fiends were, and named them in the verdict: Belial, Satan,
      and Behemoth. This has always seemed a doubtful thing to me, and not
      entitled to much credit. I think so for this reason: if the University had
      actually known it was those three, it would for very consistency’s sake
      have told how it knew it, and not stopped with the mere assertion, since
      it had made Joan explain how she knew they were not fiends. Does not that
      seem reasonable? To my mind the University’s position was weak, and I will
      tell you why. It had claimed that Joan’s angels were devils in disguise,
      and we all know that devils do disguise themselves as angels; up to that
      point the University’s position was strong; but you see yourself that it
      eats its own argument when it turns around and pretends that it can tell
      who such apparitions are, while denying the like ability to a person with
      as good a head on her shoulders as the best one the University could
      produce.
    </p>
    <p>
      The doctors of the University had to see those creatures in order to know;
      and if Joan was deceived, it is argument that they in their turn could
      also be deceived, for their insight and judgment were surely not clearer
      than hers.
    </p>
    <p>
      As to the other point which I have thought may have proved a difficulty
      and cost the University delay, I will touch but a moment upon that, and
      pass on. The University decided that it was blasphemy for Joan to say that
      her saints spoke French and not English, and were on the French side in
      political sympathies. I think that the thing which troubled the doctors of
      theology was this: they had decided that the three Voices were Satan and
      two other devils; but they had also decided that these Voices were not on
      the French side—thereby tacitly asserting that they were on the
      English side; and if on the English side, then they must be angels and not
      devils. Otherwise, the situation was embarrassing. You see, the University
      being the wisest and deepest and most erudite body in the world, it would
      like to be logical if it could, for the sake of its reputation; therefore
      it would study and study, days and days, trying to find some good
      common-sense reason for proving the Voices to be devils in Article No. 1
      and proving them to be angels in Article No. 10. However, they had to give
      it up. They found no way out; and so, to this day, the University’s
      verdict remains just so—devils in No. 1, angels in No. 10; and no
      way to reconcile the discrepancy.
    </p>
    <p>
      The envoys brought the verdict to Rouen, and with it a letter for Cauchon
      which was full of fervid praise. The University complimented him on his
      zeal in hunting down this woman “whose venom had infected the faithful of
      the whole West,” and as recompense it as good as promised him “a crown of
      imperishable glory in heaven.” Only that!—a crown in heaven; a
      promissory note and no indorser; always something away off yonder; not a
      word about the Archbishopric of Rouen, which was the thing Cauchon was
      destroying his soul for. A crown in heaven; it must have sounded like a
      sarcasm to him, after all his hard work. What should he do in heaven? he
      did not know anybody there.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the nineteenth of May a court of fifty judges sat in the archiepiscopal
      palace to discuss Joan’s fate. A few wanted her delivered over to the
      secular arm at once for punishment, but the rest insisted that she be once
      more “charitably admonished” first.
    </p>
    <p>
      So the same court met in the castle on the twenty-third, and Joan was
      brought to the bar. Pierre Maurice, a canon of Rouen, made a speech to
      Joan in which he admonished her to save her life and her soul by
      renouncing her errors and surrendering to the Church. He finished with a
      stern threat: if she remained obstinate the damnation of her soul was
      certain, the destruction of her body probable. But Joan was immovable. She
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If I were under sentence, and saw the fire before me, and the executioner
      ready to light it—more, if I were in the fire itself, I would say
      none but the things which I have said in these trials; and I would abide
      by them till I died.”
     </p>
    <p>
      A deep silence followed now, which endured some moments. It lay upon me
      like a weight. I knew it for an omen. Then Cauchon, grave and solemn,
      turned to Pierre Maurice:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Have you anything further to say?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The priest bowed low, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Nothing, my lord.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Prisoner at the bar, have you anything further to say?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Nothing.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Then the debate is closed. To-morrow, sentence will be pronounced. Remove
      the prisoner.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She seemed to go from the place erect and noble. But I do not know; my
      sight was dim with tears.
    </p>
    <p>
      To-morrow—twenty-fourth of May! Exactly a year since I saw her go
      speeding across the plain at the head of her troops, her silver helmet
      shining, her silvery cape fluttering in the wind, her white plumes
      flowing, her sword held aloft; saw her charge the Burgundian camp three
      times, and carry it; saw her wheel to the right and spur for the duke’s
      reserves; saw her fling herself against it in the last assault she was
      ever to make. And now that fatal day was come again—and see what it
      was bringing!
    </p>
    <h3>
      19 Our Last Hopes of Rescue Fail
    </h3>
    <p>
      JOAN HAD been adjudged guilty of heresy, sorcery, and all the other
      terrible crimes set forth in the Twelve Articles, and her life was in
      Cauchon’s hands at last. He could send her to the stake at once. His work
      was finished now, you think? He was satisfied? Not at all. What would his
      Archbishopric be worth if the people should get the idea into their heads
      that this faction of interested priests, slaving under the English lash,
      had wrongly condemned and burned Joan of Arc, Deliverer of France? That
      would be to make of her a holy martyr. Then her spirit would rise from her
      body’s ashes, a thousandfold reinforced, and sweep the English domination
      into the sea, and Cauchon along with it. No, the victory was not complete
      yet. Joan’s guilt must be established by evidence which would satisfy the
      people. Where was that evidence to be found? There was only one person in
      the world who could furnish it—Joan of Arc herself. She must condemn
      herself, and in public—at least she must seem to do it.
    </p>
    <p>
      But how was this to be managed? Weeks had been spent already in trying to
      get her to surrender—time wholly wasted; what was to persuade her
      now? Torture had been threatened, the fire had been threatened; what was
      left? Illness, deadly fatigue, and the sight of the fire, the presence of
      the fire! That was left.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now that was a shrewd thought. She was but a girl after all, and, under
      illness and exhaustion, subject to a girl’s weaknesses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, it was shrewdly thought. She had tacitly said herself that under the
      bitter pains of the rack they would be able to extort a false confession
      from her. It was a hint worth remembering, and it was remembered.
    </p>
    <p>
      She had furnished another hint at the same time: that as soon as the pains
      were gone, she would retract the confession. That hint was also
      remembered.
    </p>
    <p>
      She had herself taught them what to do, you see. First, they must wear out
      her strength, then frighten her with the fire. Second, while the fright
      was on her, she must be made to sign a paper.
    </p>
    <p>
      But she would demand a reading of the paper. They could not venture to
      refuse this, with the public there to hear. Suppose that during the
      reading her courage should return?—she would refuse to sign then.
      Very well, even that difficulty could be got over. They could read a short
      paper of no importance, then slip a long and deadly one into its place and
      trick her into signing that.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yet there was still one other difficulty. If they made her seem to abjure,
      that would free her from the death-penalty. They could keep her in a
      prison of the Church, but they could not kill her.
    </p>
    <p>
      That would not answer; for only her death would content the English. Alive
      she was a terror, in a prison or out of it. She had escaped from two
      prisons already.
    </p>
    <p>
      But even that difficulty could be managed. Cauchon would make promises to
      her; in return she would promise to leave off the male dress. He would
      violate his promises, and that would so situate her that she would not be
      able to keep hers. Her lapse would condemn her to the stake, and the stake
      would be ready.
    </p>
    <p>
      These were the several moves; there was nothing to do but to make them,
      each in its order, and the game was won. One might almost name the day
      that the betrayed girl, the most innocent creature in France and the
      noblest, would go to her pitiful death.
    </p>
    <p>
      The world knows now that Cauchon’s plan was as I have sketched it to you,
      but the world did not know it at that time. There are sufficient
      indications that Warwick and all the other English chiefs except the
      highest one—the Cardinal of Winchester—were not let into the
      secret, also, that only Loyseleur and Beaupere, on the French side, knew
      the scheme. Sometimes I have doubted if even Loyseleur and Beaupere knew
      the whole of it at first. However, if any did, it was these two.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is usual to let the condemned pass their last night of life in peace,
      but this grace was denied to poor Joan, if one may credit the rumors of
      the time. Loyseleur was smuggled into her presence, and in the character
      of priest, friend, and secret partisan of France and hater of England, he
      spent some hours in beseeching her to do “the only right an righteous
      thing”—submit to the Church, as a good Christian should; and that
      then she would straightway get out of the clutches of the dreaded English
      and be transferred to the Church’s prison, where she would be honorably
      used and have women about her for jailers. He knew where to touch her. He
      knew how odious to her was the presence of her rough and profane English
      guards; he knew that her Voices had vaguely promised something which she
      interpreted to be escape, rescue, release of some sort, and the chance to
      burst upon France once more and victoriously complete the great work which
      she had been commissioned of Heaven to do. Also there was that other
      thing: if her failing body could be further weakened by loss of rest and
      sleep now, her tired mind would be dazed and drowsy on the morrow, and in
      ill condition to stand out against persuasions, threats, and the sight of
      the stake, and also be purblind to traps and snares which it would be
      swift to detect when in its normal estate.
    </p>
    <p>
      I do not need to tell you that there was no rest for me that night. Nor
      for Noel. We went to the main gate of the city before nightfall, with a
      hope in our minds, based upon that vague prophecy of Joan’s Voices which
      seemed to promise a rescue by force at the last moment. The immense news
      had flown swiftly far and wide that at last Joan of Arc was condemned, and
      would be sentenced and burned alive on the morrow; and so crowds of people
      were flowing in at the gate, and other crowds were being refused admission
      by the soldiery; these being people who brought doubtful passes or none at
      all. We scanned these crowds eagerly, but there was nothing about them to
      indicate that they were our old war-comrades in disguise, and certainly
      there were no familiar faces among them. And so, when the gate was closed
      at last, we turned away grieved, and more disappointed than we cared to
      admit, either in speech or thought.
    </p>
    <p>
      The streets were surging tides of excited men. It was difficult to make
      one’s way. Toward midnight our aimless tramp brought us to the
      neighborhood of the beautiful church of St. Ouen, and there all was bustle
      and work. The square was a wilderness of torches and people; and through a
      guarded passage dividing the pack, laborers were carrying planks and
      timbers and disappearing with them through the gate of the churchyard. We
      asked what was going forward; the answer was:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Scaffolds and the stake. Don’t you know that the French witch is to be
      burned in the morning?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then we went away. We had no heart for that place.
    </p>
    <p>
      At dawn we were at the city gate again; this time with a hope which our
      wearied bodies and fevered minds magnified into a large probability. We
      had heard a report that the Abbot of Jumieges with all his monks was
      coming to witness the burning. Our desire, abetted by our imagination,
      turned those nine hundred monks into Joan’s old campaigners, and their
      Abbot into La Hire or the Bastard or D’Alencon; and we watched them file
      in, unchallenged, the multitude respectfully dividing and uncovering while
      they passed, with our hearts in our throats and our eyes swimming with
      tears of joy and pride and exultation; and we tried to catch glimpses of
      the faces under the cowls, and were prepared to give signal to any
      recognized face that we were Joan’s men and ready and eager to kill and be
      killed in the good cause. How foolish we were!
    </p>
    <p>
      But we were young, you know, and youth hopeth all things, believeth all
      things.
    </p>
    <h3>
      20 The Betrayal
    </h3>
    <p>
      IN THE MORNING I was at my official post. It was on a platform raised the
      height of a man, in the churchyard, under the eaves of St. Ouen. On this
      same platform was a crowd of priests and important citizens, and several
      lawyers. Abreast it, with a small space between, was another and larger
      platform, handsomely canopied against sun and rain, and richly carpeted;
      also it was furnished with comfortable chairs, and with two which were
      more sumptuous than the others, and raised above the general level. One of
      these two was occupied by a prince of the royal blood of England, his
      Eminence the Cardinal of Winchester; the other by Cauchon, Bishop of
      Beauvais. In the rest of the chairs sat three bishops, the
      Vice-Inquisitor, eight abbots, and the sixty-two friars and lawyers who
      had sat as Joan’s judges in her late trials.
    </p>
    <p>
      Twenty steps in front of the platforms was another—a table-topped
      pyramid of stone, built up in retreating courses, thus forming steps. Out
      of this rose that grisly thing, the stake; about the stake bundles of
      fagots and firewood were piled. On the ground at the base of the pyramid
      stood three crimson figures, the executioner and his assistants. At their
      feet lay what had been a goodly heap of brands, but was now a smokeless
      nest of ruddy coals; a foot or two from this was a supplemental supply of
      wood and fagots compacted into a pile shoulder-high and containing as much
      as six packhorse loads. Think of that. We seem so delicately made, so
      destructible, so insubstantial; yet it is easier to reduce a granite
      statue to ashes than it is to do that with a man’s body.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sight of the stake sent physical pains tingling down the nerves of my
      body; and yet, turn as I would, my eyes would keep coming back t it, such
      fascination has the gruesome and the terrible for us.
    </p>
    <p>
      The space occupied by the platforms and the stake was kept open by a wall
      of English soldiery, standing elbow to elbow, erect and stalwart figures,
      fine and sightly in their polished steel; while from behind them on every
      hand stretched far away a level plain of human heads; and there was no
      window and no housetop within our view, howsoever distant, but was black
      with patches and masses of people.
    </p>
    <p>
      But there was no noise, no stir; it was as if the world was dead. The
      impressiveness of this silence and solemnity was deepened by a leaden
      twilight, for the sky was hidden by a pall of low-hanging storm-clouds;
      and above the remote horizon faint winkings of heat-lightning played, and
      now and then one caught the dull mutterings and complainings of distant
      thunder.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last the stillness was broken. From beyond the square rose an
      indistinct sound, but familiar—court, crisp phrases of command; next
      I saw the plain of heads dividing, and the steady swing of a marching host
      was glimpsed between. My heart leaped for a moment. Was it La Hire and his
      hellions? No—that was not their gait. No, it was the prisoner and
      her escort; it was Joan of Arc, under guard, that was coming; my spirits
      sank as low as they had been before. Weak as she was they made her walk;
      they would increase her weakness all they could. The distance was not
      great—it was but a few hundred yards—but short as it was it
      was a heavy tax upon one who had been lying chained in one spot for
      months, and whose feet had lost their powers from inaction. Yes, and for a
      year Joan had known only the cool damps of a dungeon, and now she was
      dragging herself through this sultry summer heat, this airless and
      suffocating void. As she entered the gate, drooping with exhaustion, there
      was that creature Loyseleur at her side with his head bent to her ear. We
      knew afterward that he had been with her again this morning in the prison
      wearying her with his persuasions and enticing her with false promises,
      and that he was now still at the same work at the gate, imploring her to
      yield everything that would be required of her, and assuring her that if
      she would do this all would be well with her: she would be rid of the
      dreaded English and find safety in the powerful shelter and protection of
      the Church. A miserable man, a stony-hearted man!
    </p>
    <p>
      The moment Joan was seated on the platform she closed her eyes and allowed
      her chin to fall; and so sat, with her hands nestling in her lap,
      indifferent to everything, caring for nothing but rest. And she was so
      white again—white as alabaster.
    </p>
    <p>
      How the faces of that packed mass of humanity lighted up with interest,
      and with what intensity all eyes gazed upon this fragile girl! And how
      natural it was; for these people realized that at last they were looking
      upon that person whom they had so long hungered to see; a person whose
      name and fame filled all Europe, and made all other names and all other
      renowns insignificant by comparisons; Joan of Arc, the wonder of the time,
      and destined to be the wonder of all times!
    </p>
    <p>
      And I could read as by print, in their marveling countenances, the words
      that were drifting through their minds: “Can it be true, is it believable,
      that it is this little creature, this girl, this child with the good face,
      the sweet face, the beautiful face, the dear and bonny face, that has
      carried fortresses by storm, charged at the head of victorious armies,
      blown the might of England out of her path with a breath, and fought a
      long campaign, solitary and alone, against the massed brains and learning
      of France—and had won it if the fight had been fair!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Evidently Cauchon had grown afraid of Manchon because of his pretty
      apparent leanings toward Joan, for another recorder was in the chief place
      here, which left my master and me nothing to do but sit idle and look on.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, I suppose that everything had been done which could be thought of to
      tire Joan’s body and mind, but it was a mistake; one more device had been
      invented. This was to preach a long sermon to her in that oppressive heat.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the preacher began, she cast up one distressed and disappointed look,
      then dropped her head again. This preacher was Guillaume Erard, an
      oratorical celebrity. He got his text from the Twelve Lies. He emptied
      upon Joan al the calumnies in detail that had been bottled up in that mass
      of venom, and called her all the brutal names that the Twelve were labeled
      with, working himself into a whirlwind of fury as he went on; but his
      labors were wasted, she seemed lost in dreams, she made no sign, she did
      not seem to hear. At last he launched this apostrophe:
    </p>
    <p>
      “O France, how hast thou been abused! Thou hast always been the home of
      Christianity; but now, Charles, who calls himself thy King and governor,
      indorses, like the heretic and schismatic that he is, the words and deeds
      of a worthless and infamous woman!” Joan raised her head, and her eyes
      began to burn and flash. The preacher turned to her: “It is to you, Joan,
      that I speak, and I tell you that your King is schismatic and a heretic!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Ah, he might abuse her to his heart’s content; she could endure that; but
      to her dying moment she could never hear in patience a word against that
      ingrate, that treacherous dog our King, whose proper place was here, at
      this moment, sword in hand, routing these reptiles and saving this most
      noble servant that ever King had in this world—and he would have
      been there if he had not been what I have called him. Joan’s loyal soul
      was outraged, and she turned upon the preacher and flung out a few words
      with a spirit which the crowd recognized as being in accordance with the
      Joan of Arc traditions:
    </p>
    <p>
      “By my faith, sir! I make bold to say and swear, on pain of death, that he
      is the most noble Christian of all Christians, and the best lover of the
      faith and the Church!”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was an explosion of applause from the crowd—which angered the
      preacher, for he had been aching long to hear an expression like this, and
      now that it was come at last it had fallen to the wrong person: he had
      done all the work; the other had carried off all the spoil. He stamped his
      foot and shouted to the sheriff:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Make her shut up!”
     </p>
    <p>
      That made the crowd laugh.
    </p>
    <p>
      A mob has small respect for a grown man who has to call on a sheriff to
      protect him from a sick girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan had damaged the preacher’s cause more with one sentence than he had
      helped it with a hundred; so he was much put out, and had trouble to get a
      good start again. But he needn’t have bothered; there was no occasion. It
      was mainly an English-feeling mob. It had but obeyed a law of our nature—an
      irresistible law—to enjoy and applaud a spirited and promptly
      delivered retort, no matter who makes it. The mob was with the preacher;
      it had been beguiled for a moment, but only that; it would soon return. It
      was there to see this girl burnt; so that it got that satisfaction—without
      too much delay—it would be content.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently the preacher formally summoned Joan to submit to the Church. He
      made the demand with confidence, for he had gotten the idea from Loyseleur
      and Beaupere that she was worn to the bone, exhausted, and would not be
      able to put forth any more resistance; and, indeed, to look at her it
      seemed that they must be right. Nevertheless, she made one more effort to
      hold her ground, and said, wearily:
    </p>
    <p>
      “As to that matter, I have answered my judges before. I have told them to
      report all that I have said and done to our Holy Father the Pope—to
      whom, and to God first, I appeal.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Again, out of her native wisdom, she had brought those words of tremendous
      import, but was ignorant of their value. But they could have availed her
      nothing in any case, now, with the stake there and these thousands of
      enemies about her. Yet they made every churchman there blench, and the
      preacher changed the subject with all haste. Well might those criminals
      blench, for Joan’s appeal of her case to the Pope stripped Cauchon at once
      of jurisdiction over it, and annulled all that he and his judges had
      already done in the matter and all that they should do in it henceforth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan went on presently to reiterate, after some further talk, that she had
      acted by command of God in her deeds and utterances; then, when an attempt
      was made to implicate the King, and friends of hers and his, she stopped
      that. She said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I charge my deeds and words upon no one, neither upon my King nor any
      other. If there is any fault in them, I am responsible and no other.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She was asked if she would not recant those of her words and deeds which
      had been pronounced evil by her judges. Here answer made confusion and
      damage again:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I submit them to God and the Pope.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The Pope once more! It was very embarrassing. Here was a person who was
      asked to submit her case to the Church, and who frankly consents—offers
      to submit it to the very head of it. What more could any one require? How
      was one to answer such a formidably unanswerable answer as that?
    </p>
    <p>
      The worried judges put their heads together and whispered and planned and
      discussed. Then they brought forth this sufficiently shambling conclusion—but
      it was the best they could do, in so close a place: they said the Pope was
      so far away; and it was not necessary to go to him anyway, because the
      present judges had sufficient power and authority to deal with the present
      case, and were in effect “the Church” to that extent. At another time they
      could have smiled at this conceit, but not now; they were not comfortable
      enough now.
    </p>
    <p>
      The mob was getting impatient. It was beginning to put on a threatening
      aspect; it was tired of standing, tired of the scorching heat; and the
      thunder was coming nearer, the lightning was flashing brighter. It was
      necessary to hurry this matter to a close. Erard showed Joan a written
      form, which had been prepared and made all ready beforehand, and asked her
      to abjure.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Abjure? What is abjure?”
     </p>
    <p>
      She did not know the word. It was explained to her by Massieu. She tried
      to understand, but she was breaking, under exhaustion, and she could not
      gather the meaning. It was all a jumble and confusion of strange words. In
      her despair she sent out this beseeching cry:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I appeal to the Church universal whether I ought to abjure or not!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Erard exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      “You shall abjure instantly, or instantly be burnt!”
     </p>
    <p>
      She glanced up, at those awful words, and for the first time she saw the
      stake and the mass of red coals—redder and angrier than ever now
      under the constantly deepening storm-gloom. She gasped and staggered up
      out of her seat muttering and mumbling incoherently, and gazed vacantly
      upon the people and the scene about her like one who is dazed, or thinks
      he dreams, and does not know where he is.
    </p>
    <p>
      The priests crowded about her imploring her to sign the paper, there were
      many voices beseeching and urging her at once, there was great turmoil and
      shouting and excitement among the populace and everywhere.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Sign! sign!” from the priests; “sign—sign and be saved!” And
      Loyseleur was urging at her ear, “Do as I told you—do not destroy
      yourself!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan said plaintively to these people:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, you do not do well to seduce me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The judges joined their voices to the others. Yes, even the iron in their
      hearts melted, and they said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “O Joan, we pity you so! Take back what you have said, or we must deliver
      you up to punishment.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And now there was another voice—it was from the other platform—pealing
      solemnly above the din: Cauchon’s—reading the sentence of death!
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan’s strength was all spent. She stood looking about her in a bewildered
      way a moment, then slowly she sank to her knees, and bowed her head and
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I submit.”
     </p>
    <p>
      They gave her no time to reconsider—they knew the peril of that. The
      moment the words were out of her mouth Massieu was reading to her the
      abjuration, and she was repeating the words after him mechanically,
      unconsciously—and smiling; for her wandering mind was far away in
      some happier world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then this short paper of six lines was slipped aside and a long one of
      many pages was smuggled into its place, and she, noting nothing, put her
      mark on it, saying, in pathetic apology, that she did not know how to
      write. But a secretary of the King of England was there to take care of
      that defect; he guided her hand with his own, and wrote her name—Jehanne.
    </p>
    <p>
      The great crime was accomplished. She had signed—what? She did not
      know—but the others knew. She had signed a paper confessing herself
      a sorceress, a dealer with devils, a liar, a blasphemer of God and His
      angels, a lover of blood, a promoter of sedition, cruel, wicked,
      commissioned of Satan; and this signature of hers bound her to resume the
      dress of a woman.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were other promises, but that one would answer, without the others;
      and that one could be made to destroy her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Loyseleur pressed forward and praised her for having done “such a good
      day’s work.”
     </p>
    <p>
      But she was still dreamy, she hardly heard.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then Cauchon pronounced the words which dissolved the excommunication and
      restored her to her beloved Church, with all the dear privileges of
      worship. Ah, she heard that! You could see it in the deep gratitude that
      rose in her face and transfigured it with joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      But how transient was that happiness! For Cauchon, without a tremor of
      pity in his voice, added these crushing words:
    </p>
    <p>
      “And that she may repent of her crimes and repeat them no more, she is
      sentenced to perpetual imprisonment, with the bread of affliction and the
      water of anguish!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Perpetual imprisonment! She had never dreamed of that—such a thing
      had never been hinted to her by Loyseleur or by any other. Loyseleur had
      distinctly said and promised that “all would be well with her.” And the
      very last words spoken to her by Erard, on that very platform, when he was
      urging her to abjure, was a straight, unqualified promised—that if
      she would do it she should go free from captivity.
    </p>
    <p>
      She stood stunned and speechless a moment; then she remembered, with such
      solacement as the thought could furnish, that by another clear promise
      made by Cauchon himself—she would at least be the Church’s captive,
      and have women about her in place of a brutal foreign soldiery. So she
      turned to the body of priests and said, with a sad resignation:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now, you men of the Church, take me to your prison, and leave me no
      longer in the hands of the English”; and she gathered up her chains and
      prepared to move.
    </p>
    <p>
      But alas! now came these shameful words from Cauchon—and with them a
      mocking laugh:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Take her to the prison whence she came!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Poor abused girl! She stood dumb, smitten, paralyzed. It was pitiful to
      see. She had been beguiled, lied to, betrayed; she saw it all now.
    </p>
    <p>
      The rumbling of a drum broke upon the stillness, and for just one moment
      she thought of the glorious deliverance promised by her Voices—I
      read it in the rapture that lit her face; then she saw what it was—her
      prison escort—and that light faded, never to revive again. And now
      her head began a piteous rocking motion, swaying slowly, this way and
      that, as is the way when one is suffering unwordable pain, or when one’s
      heart is broken; then drearily she went from us, with her face in her
      hands, and sobbing bitterly.
    </p>
    <h3>
      21 Respited Only for Torture
    </h3>
    <p>
      THERE IS no certainty that any one in all Rouen was in the secret of the
      deep game which Cauchon was playing except the Cardinal of Winchester.
      Then you can imagine the astonishment and stupefaction of that vast mob
      gathered there and those crowds of churchmen assembled on the two
      platforms, when they saw Joan of Arc moving away, alive and whole—slipping
      out of their grip at last, after all this tedious waiting, all this
      tantalizing expectancy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nobody was able to stir or speak for a while, so paralyzing was the
      universal astonishment, so unbelievable the fact that the stake was
      actually standing there unoccupied and its prey gone.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then suddenly everybody broke into a fury of rage; maledictions and
      charges of treachery began to fly freely; yes, and even stones: a stone
      came near killing the Cardinal of Winchester—it just missed his
      head. But the man who threw it was not to blame, for he was excited, and a
      person who is excited never can throw straight.
    </p>
    <p>
      The tumult was very great, indeed, for a while. In the midst of it a
      chaplain of the Cardinal even forgot the proprieties so far as to
      opprobriously assail the August Bishop of Beauvais himself, shaking his
      fist in his face and shouting:
    </p>
    <p>
      “By God, you are a traitor!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You lie!” responded the Bishop.
    </p>
    <p>
      He a traitor! Oh, far from it; he certainly was the last Frenchman that
      any Briton had a right to bring that charge against.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Earl of Warwick lost his temper, too. He was a doughty soldier, but
      when it came to the intellectuals—when it came to delicate chicane,
      and scheming, and trickery—he couldn’t see any further through a
      millstone than another. So he burst out in his frank warrior fashion, and
      swore that the King of England was being treacherously used, and that Joan
      of Arc was going to be allowed to cheat the stake. But they whispered
      comfort into his ear:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Give yourself no uneasiness, my lord; we shall soon have her again.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Perhaps the like tidings found their way all around, for good news travels
      fast as well as bad. At any rate, the ragings presently quieted down, and
      the huge concourse crumbled apart and disappeared. And thus we reached the
      noon of that fearful Thursday.
    </p>
    <p>
      We two youths were happy; happier than any words can tell—for we
      were not in the secret any more than the rest. Joan’s life was saved. We
      knew that, and that was enough. France would hear of this day’s infamous
      work—and then! Why, then her gallant sons would flock to her
      standard by thousands and thousands, multitudes upon multitudes, and their
      wrath would be like the wrath of the ocean when the storm-winds sweep it;
      and they would hurl themselves against this doomed city and overwhelm it
      like the resistless tides of that ocean, and Joan of Arc would march
      again!
    </p>
    <p>
      In six days—seven days—one short week—noble France,
      grateful France, indignant France, would be thundering at these gates—let
      us count the hours, let us count the minutes, let us count the seconds! O
      happy day, O day of ecstasy, how our hearts sang in our bosoms!
    </p>
    <p>
      For we were young then, yes, we were very young.
    </p>
    <p>
      Do you think the exhausted prisoner was allowed to rest and sleep after
      she had spent the small remnant of her strength in dragging her tired body
      back to the dungeon?
    </p>
    <p>
      No, there was no rest for her, with those sleuth-hounds on her track.
      Cauchon and some of his people followed her to her lair straightway; they
      found her dazed and dull, her mental and physical forces in a state of
      prostration. They told her she had abjured; that she had made certain
      promises—among them, to resume the apparel of her sex; and that if
      she relapsed, the Church would cast her out for good and all. She heard
      the words, but they had no meaning to her. She was like a person who has
      taken a narcotic and is dying for sleep, dying for rest from nagging,
      dying to be let alone, and who mechanically does everything the persecutor
      asks, taking but dull note of the things done, and but dully recording
      them in the memory. And so Joan put on the gown which Cauchon and his
      people had brought; and would come to herself by and by, and have at first
      but a dim idea as to when and how the change had come about.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon went away happy and content. Joan had resumed woman’s dress
      without protest; also she had been formally warned against relapsing. He
      had witnesses to these facts. How could matters be better?
    </p>
    <p>
      But suppose she should not relapse?
    </p>
    <p>
      Why, then she must be forced to do it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Did Cauchon hint to the English guards that thenceforth if they chose to
      make their prisoner’s captivity crueler and bitterer than ever, no
      official notice would be taken of it? Perhaps so; since the guards did
      begin that policy at once, and no official notice was taken of it. Yes,
      from that moment Joan’s life in that dungeon was made almost unendurable.
      Do not ask me to enlarge upon it. I will not do it.
    </p>
    <h3>
      22 Joan Gives the Fatal Answer
    </h3>

    <p>
      FRIDAY and Saturday were happy days for Noel and me. Our minds were full
      of our splendid dream of France aroused—France shaking her mane—France
      on the march—France at the gates—Rouen in ashes, and Joan
      free! Our imagination was on fire; we were delirious with pride and joy.
      For we were very young, as I have said.
    </p>
    <p>
      We knew nothing about what had been happening in the dungeon in the
      yester-afternoon. We supposed that as Joan had abjured and been taken back
      into the forgiving bosom of the Church, she was being gently used now, and
      her captivity made as pleasant and comfortable for her as the
      circumstances would allow. So, in high contentment, we planned out our
      share in the great rescue, and fought our part of the fight over and over
      again during those two happy days—as happy days as ever I have
      known.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sunday morning came. I was awake, enjoying the balmy, lazy weather, and
      thinking. Thinking of the rescue—what else? I had no other thought
      now. I was absorbed in that, drunk with the happiness of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      I heard a voice shouting far down the street, and soon it came nearer, and
      I caught the words:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan of Arc has relapsed! The witch’s time has come!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It stopped my heart, it turned my blood to ice. That was more than sixty
      years ago, but that triumphant note rings as clear in my memory to-day as
      it rang in my ear that long-vanished summer morning. We are so strangely
      made; the memories that could make us happy pass away; it is the memories
      that break our hearts that abide.
    </p>
    <p>
      Soon other voices took up that cry—tens, scores, hundreds of voices;
      all the world seemed filled with the brutal joy of it. And there were
      other clamors—the clatter of rushing feet, merry congratulations,
      bursts of coarse laughter, the rolling of drums, the boom and crash of
      distant bands profaning the sacred day with the music of victory and
      thanksgiving.
    </p>
    <p>
      About the middle of the afternoon came a summons for Manchon and me to go
      to Joan’s dungeon—a summons from Cauchon. But by that time distrust
      had already taken possession of the English and their soldiery again, and
      all Rouen was in an angry and threatening mood. We could see plenty of
      evidences of this from our own windows—fist-shaking, black looks,
      tumultuous tides of furious men billowing by along the street.
    </p>
    <p>
      And we learned that up at the castle things were going very badly, indeed;
      that there was a great mob gathered there who considered the relapse a lie
      and a priestly trick, and among them many half-drunk English soldiers.
      Moreover, these people had gone beyond words. They had laid hands upon a
      number of churchmen who were trying to enter the castle, and it had been
      difficult work to rescue them and save their lives.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so Manchon refused to go. He said he would not go a step without a
      safeguard from Warwick. So next morning Warwick sent an escort of
      soldiers, and then we went. Matters had not grown peacefuler meantime, but
      worse. The soldiers protected us from bodily damage, but as we passed
      through the great mob at the castle we were assailed with insults and
      shameful epithets. I bore it well enough, though, and said to myself, with
      secret satisfaction, “In three or four short days, my lads, you will be
      employing your tongues in a different sort from this—and I shall be
      there to hear.”
     </p>
    <p>
      To my mind these were as good as dead men. How many of them would still be
      alive after the rescue that was coming? Not more than enough to amuse the
      executioner a short half-hour, certainly.
    </p>
    <p>
      It turned out that the report was true. Joan had relapsed. She was sitting
      there in her chains, clothed again in her male attire.
    </p>
    <p>
      She accused nobody. That was her way. It was not in her character to hold
      a servant to account for what his master had made him do, and her mind had
      cleared now, and she knew that the advantage which had been taken of her
      the previous morning had its origin, not in the subordinate but in the
      master—Cauchon.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here is what had happened. While Joan slept, in the early morning of
      Sunday, one of the guards stole her female apparel and put her male attire
      in its place. When she woke she asked for the other dress, but the guards
      refused to give it back. She protested, and said she was forbidden to wear
      the male dress. But they continued to refuse. She had to have clothing,
      for modesty’s sake; moreover, she saw that she could not save her life if
      she must fight for it against treacheries like this; so she put on the
      forbidden garments, knowing what the end would be. She was weary of the
      struggle, poor thing.
    </p>
    <p>
      We had followed in the wake of Cauchon, the Vice-Inquisitor, and the
      others—six or eight—and when I saw Joan sitting there,
      despondent, forlorn, and still in chains, when I was expecting to find her
      situation so different, I did not know what to make of it. The shock was
      very great. I had doubted the relapse perhaps; possibly I had believed in
      it, but had not realized it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon’s victory was complete. He had had a harassed and irritated and
      disgusted look for a long time, but that was all gone now, and contentment
      and serenity had taken its place. His purple face was full of tranquil and
      malicious happiness. He went trailing his robes and stood grandly in front
      of Joan, with his legs apart, and remained so more than a minute, gloating
      over her and enjoying the sight of this poor ruined creature, who had won
      so lofty a place for him in the service of the meek and merciful Jesus,
      Saviour of the World, Lord of the Universe—in case England kept her
      promise to him, who kept no promises himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently the judges began to question Joan. One of them, named Marguerie,
      who was a man with more insight than prudence, remarked upon Joan’s change
      of clothing, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There is something suspicious about this. How could it have come about
      without connivance on the part of others? Perhaps even something worse?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Thousand devils!” screamed Cauchon, in a fury. “Will you shut your
      mouth?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Armagnac! Traitor!” shouted the soldiers on guard, and made a rush for
      Marguerie with their lances leveled. It was with the greatest difficulty
      that he was saved from being run through the body. He made no more
      attempts to help the inquiry, poor man. The other judges proceeded with
      the questionings.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Why have you resumed this male habit?”
     </p>
    <p>
      I did not quite catch her answer, for just then a soldier’s halberd
      slipped from his fingers and fell on the stone floor with a crash; but I
      thought I understood Joan to say that she had resumed it of her own
      motion.
    </p>
    <p>
      “But you have promised and sworn that you would not go back to it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I was full of anxiety to hear her answer to that question; and when it
      came it was just what I was expecting. She said—quiet quietly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I have never intended and never understood myself to swear I would not
      resume it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There—I had been sure, all along, that she did not know what she was
      doing and saying on the platform Thursday, and this answer of hers was
      proof that I had not been mistaken. Then she went on to add this:
    </p>
    <p>
      “But I had a right to resume it, because the promises made to me have not
      been kept—promises that I should be allowed to go to mass and
      receive the communion, and that I should be freed from the bondage of
      these chains—but they are still upon me, as you see.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Nevertheless, you have abjured, and have especially promised to return no
      more to the dress of a man.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then Joan held out her fettered hands sorrowfully toward these unfeeling
      men and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I would rather die than continue so. But if they may be taken off, and if
      I may hear mass, and be removed to a penitential prison, and have a woman
      about me, I will be good, and will do what shall seem good to you that I
      do.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Cauchon sniffed scoffingly at that. Honor the compact which he and his had
      made with her?
    </p>
    <p>
      Fulfil its conditions? What need of that? Conditions had been a good thing
      to concede, temporarily, and for advantage; but they have served their
      turn—let something of a fresher sort and of more consequence be
      considered. The resumption of the male dress was sufficient for all
      practical purposes, but perhaps Joan could be led to add something to that
      fatal crime. So Cauchon asked her if her Voices had spoken to her since
      Thursday—and he reminded her of her abjuration.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Yes,” she answered; and then it came out that the Voices had talked with
      her about the abjuration—told her about it, I suppose. She
      guilelessly reasserted the heavenly origin of her mission, and did it with
      the untroubled mien of one who was not conscious that she had ever
      knowingly repudiated it. So I was convinced once more that she had had no
      notion of what she was doing that Thursday morning on the platform.
      Finally she said, “My Voices told me I did very wrong to confess that what
      I had done was not well.” Then she sighed, and said with simplicity, “But
      it was the fear of the fire that made me do so.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That is, fear of the fire had made her sign a paper whose contents she had
      not understood then, but understood now by revelation of her Voices and by
      testimony of her persecutors.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was sane now and not exhausted; her courage had come back, and with it
      her inborn loyalty to the truth. She was bravely and serenely speaking it
      again, knowing that it would deliver her body up to that very fire which
      had such terrors for her.
    </p>
    <p>
      That answer of hers was quite long, quite frank, wholly free from
      concealments or palliations. It made me shudder; I knew she was
      pronouncing sentence of death upon herself. So did poor Manchon. And he
      wrote in the margin abreast of it:
    </p>
    <p>
      “RESPONSIO MORTIFERA.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Fatal answer. Yes, all present knew that it was, indeed, a fatal answer.
      Then there fell a silence such as falls in a sick-room when the watchers
      of the dying draw a deep breath and say softly one to another, “All is
      over.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Here, likewise, all was over; but after some moments Cauchon, wishing to
      clinch this matter and make it final, put this question:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Do you still believe that your Voices are St. Marguerite and St.
      Catherine?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes—and that they come from God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yet you denied them on the scaffold?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she made direct and clear affirmation that she had never had any
      intention to deny them; and that if—I noted the if—“if she had
      made some retractions and revocations on the scaffold it was from fear of
      the fire, and it was a violation of the truth.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There it is again, you see. She certainly never knew what it was she had
      done on the scaffold until she was told of it afterward by these people
      and by her Voices.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now she closed this most painful scene with these words; and there was
      a weary note in them that was pathetic:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I would rather do my penance all at once; let me die. I cannot endure
      captivity any longer.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The spirit born for sunshine and liberty so longed for release that it
      would take it in any form, even that.
    </p>
    <p>
      Several among the company of judges went from the place troubled and
      sorrowful, the others in another mood. In the court of the castle we found
      the Earl of Warwick and fifty English waiting, impatient for news. As soon
      as Cauchon saw them he shouted—laughing—think of a man
      destroying a friendless poor girl and then having the heart to laugh at
      it:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Make yourselves comfortable—it’s all over with her!”
     </p>
    <h3>
      23 The Time Is at Hand
    </h3>
    <p>
      THE YOUNG can sink into abysses of despondency, and it was so with Noel
      and me now; but the hopes of the young are quick to rise again, and it was
      so with ours. We called back that vague promise of the Voices, and said
      the one to the other that the glorious release was to happen at “the last
      moment”—“that other time was not the last moment, but this is; it
      will happen now; the King will come, La Hire will come, and with them our
      veterans, and behind them all France!” And so we were full of heart again,
      and could already hear, in fancy, that stirring music the clash of steel
      and the war-cries and the uproar of the onset, and in fancy see our
      prisoner free, her chains gone, her sword in her hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      But this dream was to pass also, and come to nothing. Late at night, when
      Manchon came in, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I am come from the dungeon, and I have a message for you from that poor
      child.”
     </p>
    <p>
      A message to me! If he had been noticing I think he would have discovered
      me—discovered that my indifference concerning the prisoner was a
      pretense; for I was caught off my guard, and was so moved and so exalted
      to be so honored by her that I must have shown my feeling in my face and
      manner.
    </p>
    <p>
      “A message for me, your reverence?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes. It is something she wishes done. She said she had noticed the young
      man who helps me, and that he had a good face; and did I think he would do
      a kindness for her? I said I knew you would, and asked her what it was,
      and she said a letter—would you write a letter to her mother?
    </p>
    <p>
      “And I said you would. But I said I would do it myself, and gladly; but
      she said no, that my labors were heavy, and she thought the young man
      would not mind the doing of this service for one not able to do it for
      herself, she not knowing how to write. Then I would have sent for you, and
      at that the sadness vanished out of her face. Why, it was as if she was
      going to see a friend, poor friendless thing. But I was not permitted. I
      did my best, but the orders remain as strict as ever, the doors are closed
      against all but officials; as before, none but officials may speak to her.
      So I went back and told her, and she sighed, and was sad again. Now this
      is what she begs you to write to her mother. It is partly a strange
      message, and to me means nothing, but she said her mother would
      understand. You will ‘convey her adoring love to her family and her
      village friends, and say there will be no rescue, for that this night—and
      it is the third time in the twelvemonth, and is final—she has seen
      the Vision of the Tree.’”
     </p>
    <p>
      “How strange!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, it is strange, but that is what she said; and said her parents would
      understand. And for a little time she was lost in dreams and thinkings,
      and her lips moved, and I caught in her muttering these lines, which she
      said over two or three times, and they seemed to bring peace and
      contentment to her. I set them down, thinking they might have some
      connection with her letter and be useful; but it was not so; they were a
      mere memory, floating idly in a tired mind, and they have no meaning, at
      least no relevancy.”
     </p>
    <p>
      I took the piece of paper, and found what I knew I should find:
    </p>
    <p>
      And when in exile wand’ring, we Shall fainting yearn for glimpse of thee,
      Oh, rise upon our sight!
    </p>
    <p>
      There was no hope any more. I knew it now. I knew that Joan’s letter was a
      message to Noel and me, as well as to her family, and that its object was
      to banish vain hopes from our minds and tell us from her own mouth of the
      blow that was going to fall upon us, so that we, being her soldiers, would
      know it for a command to bear it as became us and her, and so submit to
      the will of God; and in thus obeying, find assuagement of our grief. It
      was like her, for she was always thinking of others, not of herself. Yes,
      her heart was sore for us; she could find time to think of us, the
      humblest of her servants, and try to soften our pain, lighten the burden
      of our troubles—she that was drinking of the bitter waters; she that
      was walking in the Valley of the Shadow of Death.
    </p>
    <p>
      I wrote the letter. You will know what it cost me, without my telling you.
      I wrote it with the same wooden stylus which had put upon parchment the
      first words ever dictated by Joan of Arc—that high summons to the
      English to vacate France, two years past, when she was a lass of
      seventeen; it had now set down the last ones which she was ever to
      dictate. Then I broke it. For the pen that had served Joan of Arc could
      not serve any that would come after her in this earth without abasement.
    </p>
    <p>
      The next day, May 29th, Cauchon summoned his serfs, and forty-two
      responded. It is charitable to believe that the other twenty were ashamed
      to come. The forty-two pronounced her a relapsed heretic, and condemned
      her to be delivered over to the secular arm. Cauchon thanked them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he sent orders that Joan of Arc be conveyed the next morning to the
      place known as the Old Market; and that she be then delivered to the civil
      judge, and by the civil judge to the executioner. That meant she would be
      burnt.
    </p>
    <p>
      All the afternoon and evening of Tuesday, the 29th, the news was flying,
      and the people of the country-side flocking to Rouen to see the tragedy—all,
      at least, who could prove their English sympathies and count upon
      admission. The press grew thicker and thicker in the streets, the
      excitement grew higher and higher. And now a thing was noticeable again
      which had been noticeable more than once before—that there was pity
      for Joan in the hearts of many of these people. Whenever she had been in
      great danger it had manifested itself, and now it was apparent again—manifest
      in a pathetic dumb sorrow which was visible in many faces.
    </p>
    <p>
      Early the next morning, Wednesday, Martin Ladvenu and another friar were
      sent to Joan to prepare her for death; and Manchon and I went with them—a
      hard service for me. We tramped through the dim corridors, winding this
      way and that, and piercing ever deeper and deeper into that vast heart of
      stone, and at last we stood before Joan. But she did not know it. She sat
      with her hands in her lap and her head bowed, thinking, and her face was
      very sad. One might not know what she was thinking of. Of her home, and
      the peaceful pastures, and the friends she was no more to see? Of her
      wrongs, and her forsaken estate, and the cruelties which had been put upon
      her? Or was it of death—the death which she had longed for, and
      which was now so close?
    </p>
    <p>
      Or was it of the kind of death she must suffer? I hoped not; for she
      feared only one kind, and that one had for her unspeakable terrors. I
      believed she so feared that one that with her strong will she would shut
      the thought of it wholly out of her mind, and hope and believe that God
      would take pity on her and grant her an easier one; and so it might chance
      that the awful news which we were bringing might come as a surprise to her
      at last.
    </p>
    <p>
      We stood silent awhile, but she was still unconscious of us, still deep in
      her sad musings and far away. Then Martin Ladvenu said, softly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan.”
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked up then, with a little start and a wan smile, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Speak. Have you a message for me?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes, my poor child. Try to bear it. Do you think you can bear it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes”—very softly, and her head drooped again.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I am come to prepare you for death.”
     </p>
    <p>
      A faint shiver trembled through her wasted body. There was a pause. In the
      stillness we could hear our breathings. Then she said, still in that low
      voice:
    </p>
    <p>
      “When will it be?”
     </p>
    <p>
      The muffled notes of a tolling bell floated to our ears out of the
      distance.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now. The time is at hand.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That slight shiver passed again.
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is so soon—ah, it is so soon!”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a long silence. The distant throbbings of the bell pulsed
      through it, and we stood motionless and listening. But it was broken at
      last:
    </p>
    <p>
      “What death is it?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “By fire!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, I knew it, I knew it!” She sprang wildly to her feet, and wound her
      hands in her hair, and began to writhe and sob, oh, so piteously, and
      mourn and grieve and lament, and turn to first one and then another of us,
      and search our faces beseechingly, as hoping she might find help and
      friendliness there, poor thing—she that had never denied these to
      any creature, even her wounded enemy on the battle-field.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, cruel, cruel, to treat me so! And must my body, that has never been
      defiled, be consumed today and turned to ashes? Ah, sooner would I that my
      head were cut off seven times than suffer this woeful death. I had the
      promise of the Church’s prison when I submitted, and if I had but been
      there, and not left here in the hands of my enemies, this miserable fate
      had not befallen me.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, I appeal to God the Great Judge, against the injustice which has been
      done me.”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was none there that could endure it. They turned away, with the
      tears running down their faces. In a moment I was on my knees at her feet.
      At once she thought only of my danger, and bent and whispered in my hear:
      “Up!—do not peril yourself, good heart. There—God bless you
      always!” and I felt the quick clasp of her hand. Mine was the last hand
      she touched with hers in life. None saw it; history does not know of it or
      tell of it, yet it is true, just as I have told it. The next moment she
      saw Cauchon coming, and she went and stood before him and reproached him,
      saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Bishop, it is by you that I die!”
     </p>
    <p>
      He was not shamed, not touched; but said, smoothly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah, be patient, Joan. You die because you have not kept your promise, but
      have returned to your sins.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Alas,” she said, “if you had put me in the Church’s prison, and given me
      right and proper keepers, as you promised, this would not have happened.
      And for this I summon you to answer before God!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then Cauchon winced, and looked less placidly content than before, and he
      turned him about and went away.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan stood awhile musing. She grew calmer, but occasionally she wiped her
      eyes, and now and then sobs shook her body; but their violence was
      modifying now, and the intervals between them were growing longer. Finally
      she looked up and saw Pierre Maurice, who had come in with the Bishop, and
      she said to him:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Master Peter, where shall I be this night?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Have you not good hope in God?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yes—and by His grace I shall be in Paradise.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Now Martin Ladvenu heard her in confession; then she begged for the
      sacrament. But how grant the communion to one who had been publicly cut
      off from the Church, and was now no more entitled to its privileges than
      an unbaptized pagan? The brother could not do this, but he sent to Cauchon
      to inquire what he must do. All laws, human and divine, were alike to that
      man—he respected none of them. He sent back orders to grant Joan
      whatever she wished. Her last speech to him had reached his fears,
      perhaps; it could not reach his heart, for he had none.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Eucharist was brought now to that poor soul that had yearned for it
      with such unutterable longing all these desolate months. It was a solemn
      moment. While we had been in the deeps of the prison, the public courts of
      the castle had been filling up with crowds of the humbler sort of men and
      women, who had learned what was going on in Joan’s cell, and had come with
      softened hearts to do—they knew not what; to hear—they knew
      not what. We knew nothing of this, for they were out of our view. And
      there were other great crowds of the like caste gathered in masses outside
      the castle gates. And when the lights and the other accompaniments of the
      Sacrament passed by, coming to Joan in the prison, all those multitudes
      kneeled down and began to pray for her, and many wept; and when the solemn
      ceremony of the communion began in Joan’s cell, out of the distance a
      moving sound was borne moaning to our ears—it was those invisible
      multitudes chanting the litany for a departing soul.
    </p>
    <p>
      The fear of the fiery death was gone from Joan of Arc now, to come again
      no more, except for one fleeting instant—then it would pass, and
      serenity and courage would take its place and abide till the end.
    </p>
    <h3>
      24 Joan the Martyr
    </h3>
    <p>
      AT NINE o’clock the Maid of Orleans, Deliverer of France, went forth in
      the grace of her innocence and her youth to lay down her life for the
      country she loved with such devotion, and for the King that had abandoned
      her. She sat in the cart that is used only for felons. In one respect she
      was treated worse than a felon; for whereas she was on her way to be
      sentenced by the civil arm, she already bore her judgment inscribed in
      advance upon a miter-shaped cap which she wore:
    </p>
    <p>
      HERETIC, RELAPSED, APOSTATE, IDOLATER
    </p>
    <p>
      In the cart with her sat the friar Martin Ladvenu and Maetre Jean Massieu.
      She looked girlishly fair and sweet and saintly in her long white robe,
      and when a gush of sunlight flooded her as she emerged from the gloom of
      the prison and was yet for a moment still framed in the arch of the somber
      gate, the massed multitudes of poor folk murmured “A vision! a vision!”
       and sank to their knees praying, and many of the women weeping; and the
      moving invocation for the dying arose again, and was taken up and borne
      along, a majestic wave of sound, which accompanied the doomed, solacing
      and blessing her, all the sorrowful way to the place of death. “Christ
      have pity! Saint Margaret have pity! Pray for her, all ye saints,
      archangels, and blessed martyrs, pray for her! Saints and angels intercede
      for her! From thy wrath, good Lord, deliver her! O Lord God, save her!
      Have mercy on her, we beseech Thee, good Lord!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It is just and true what one of the histories has said: “The poor and the
      helpless had nothing but their prayers to give Joan of Arc; but these we
      may believe were not unavailing. There are few more pathetic events
      recorded in history than this weeping, helpless, praying crowd, holding
      their lighted candles and kneeling on the pavement beneath the prison
      walls of the old fortress.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And it was so all the way: thousands upon thousands massed upon their
      knees and stretching far down the distances, thick-sown with the faint
      yellow candle-flames, like a field starred with golden flowers.
    </p>
    <p>
      But there were some that did not kneel; these were the English soldiers.
      They stood elbow to elbow, on each side of Joan’s road, and walled it in
      all the way; and behind these living walls knelt the multitudes.
    </p>
    <p>
      By and by a frantic man in priest’s garb came wailing and lamenting, and
      tore through the crowd and the barriers of soldiers and flung himself on
      his knees by Joan’s cart and put up his hands in supplication, crying out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “O forgive, forgive!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was Loyseleur!
    </p>
    <p>
      And Joan forgave him; forgave him out of a heart that knew nothing but
      forgiveness, nothing but compassion, nothing but pity for all that suffer,
      let their offense be what it might. And she had no word of reproach for
      this poor wretch who had wrought day and night with deceits and
      treacheries and hypocrisies to betray her to her death.
    </p>
    <p>
      The soldiers would have killed him, but the Earl of Warwick saved his
      life. What became of him is not known. He hid himself from the world
      somewhere, to endure his remorse as he might.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the square of the Old Market stood the two platforms and the stake that
      had stood before in the churchyard of St. Ouen. The platforms were
      occupied as before, the one by Joan and her judges, the other by great
      dignitaries, the principal being Cauchon and the English Cardinal—Winchester.
      The square was packed with people, the windows and roofs of the blocks of
      buildings surrounding it were black with them.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the preparations had been finished, all noise and movement gradually
      ceased, and a waiting stillness followed which was solemn and impressive.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now, by order of Cauchon, an ecclesiastic named Nicholas Midi preached
      a sermon, wherein he explained that when a branch of the vine—which
      is the Church—becomes diseased and corrupt, it must be cut away or
      it will corrupt and destroy the whole vine. He made it appear that Joan,
      through her wickedness, was a menace and a peril to the Church’s purity
      and holiness, and her death therefore necessary. When he was come to the
      end of his discourse he turned toward her and paused a moment, then he
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Joan, the Church can no longer protect you. Go in peace!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan had been placed wholly apart and conspicuous, to signify the Church’s
      abandonment of her, and she sat there in her loneliness, waiting in
      patience and resignation for the end. Cauchon addressed her now. He had
      been advised to read the form of her abjuration to her, and had brought it
      with him; but he changed his mind, fearing that she would proclaim the
      truth—that she had never knowingly abjured—and so bring shame
      upon him and eternal infamy. He contented himself with admonishing her to
      keep in mind her wickednesses, and repent of them, and think of her
      salvation. Then he solemnly pronounced her excommunicate and cut off from
      the body of the Church. With a final word he delivered her over to the
      secular arm for judgment and sentence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joan, weeping, knelt and began to pray. For whom? Herself? Oh, no—for
      the King of France. Her voice rose sweet and clear, and penetrated all
      hearts with its passionate pathos. She never thought of his treacheries to
      her, she never thought of his desertion of her, she never remembered that
      it was because he was an ingrate that she was here to die a miserable
      death; she remembered only that he was her King, that she was his loyal
      and loving subject, and that his enemies had undermined his cause with
      evil reports and false charges, and he not by to defend himself. And so,
      in the very presence of death, she forgot her own troubles to implore all
      in her hearing to be just to him; to believe that he was good and noble
      and sincere, and not in any way to blame for any acts of hers, neither
      advising them nor urging them, but being wholly clear and free of all
      responsibility for them. Then, closing, she begged in humble and touching
      words that all here present would pray for her and would pardon her, both
      her enemies and such as might look friendly upon her and feel pity for her
      in their hearts.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was hardly one heart there that was not touched—even the
      English, even the judges showed it, and there was many a lip that trembled
      and many an eye that was blurred with tears; yes, even the English
      Cardinal’s—that man with a political heart of stone but a human
      heart of flesh.
    </p>
    <p>
      The secular judge who should have delivered judgment and pronounced
      sentence was himself so disturbed that he forgot his duty, and Joan went
      to her death unsentenced—thus completing with an illegality what had
      begun illegally and had so continued to the end. He only said—to the
      guards:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Take her”; and to the executioner, “Do your duty.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joan asked for a cross. None was able to furnish one. But an English
      soldier broke a stick in two and crossed the pieces and tied them
      together, and this cross he gave her, moved to it by the good heart that
      was in him; and she kissed it and put it in her bosom. Then Isambard de la
      Pierre went to the church near by and brought her a consecrated one; and
      this one also she kissed, and pressed it to her bosom with rapture, and
      then kissed it again and again, covering it with tears and pouring out her
      gratitude to God and the saints.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so, weeping, and with her cross to her lips, she climbed up the cruel
      steps to the face of the stake, with the friar Isambard at her side. Then
      she was helped up to the top of the pile of wood that was built around the
      lower third of the stake and stood upon it with her back against the
      stake, and the world gazing up at her breathless. The executioner ascended
      to her side and wound chains around her slender body, and so fastened her
      to the stake. Then he descended to finish his dreadful office; and there
      she remained alone—she that had had so many friends in the days when
      she was free, and had been so loved and so dear.
    </p>
    <p>
      All these things I saw, albeit dimly and blurred with tears; but I could
      bear no more. I continued in my place, but what I shall deliver to you now
      I got by others’ eyes and others’ mouths. Tragic sounds there were that
      pierced my ears and wounded my heart as I sat there, but it is as I tell
      you: the latest image recorded by my eyes in that desolating hour was Joan
      of Arc with the grace of her comely youth still unmarred; and that image,
      untouched by time or decay, has remained with me all my days. Now I will
      go on.
    </p>
    <p>
      If any thought that now, in that solemn hour when all transgressors repent
      and confess, she would revoke her revocation and say her great deeds had
      been evil deeds and Satan and his fiends their source, they erred. No such
      thought was in her blameless mind. She was not thinking of herself and her
      troubles, but of others, and of woes that might befall them. And so,
      turning her grieving eyes about her, where rose the towers and spires of
      that fair city, she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, Rouen, Rouen, must I die here, and must you be my tomb? Ah, Rouen,
      Rouen, I have great fear that you will suffer for my death.”
     </p>
    <p>
      A whiff of smoke swept upward past her face, and for one moment terror
      seized her and she cried out, “Water! Give me holy water!” but the next
      moment her fears were gone, and they came no more to torture her.
    </p>
    <p>
      She heard the flames crackling below her, and immediately distress for a
      fellow-creature who was in danger took possession of her. It was the friar
      Isambard. She had given him her cross and begged him to raise it toward
      her face and let her eyes rest in hope and consolation upon it till she
      was entered into the peace of God. She made him go out from the danger of
      the fire. Then she was satisfied, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Now keep it always in my sight until the end.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Not even yet could Cauchon, that man without shame, endure to let her die
      in peace, but went toward her, all black with crimes and sins as he was,
      and cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I am come, Joan, to exhort you for the last time to repent and seek the
      pardon of God.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I die through you,” she said, and these were the last words she spoke to
      any upon earth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then the pitchy smoke, shot through with red flashes of flame, rolled up
      in a thick volume and hid her from sight; and from the heart of this
      darkness her voice rose strong and eloquent in prayer, and when by moments
      the wind shredded somewhat of the smoke aside, there were veiled glimpses
      of an upturned face and moving lips. At last a mercifully swift tide of
      flame burst upward, and none saw that face any more nor that form, and the
      voice was still.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, she was gone from us: JOAN OF ARC! What little words they are, to
      tell of a rich world made empty and poor!
    </p>
    <h3>
      CONCLUSION
    </h3>

    <p>
      JOAN’S BROTHER Jacques died in Domremy during the Great Trial at Rouen.
      This was according to the prophecy which Joan made that day in the
      pastures the time that she said the rest of us would go to the great wars.
    </p>
    <p>
      When her poor old father heard of the martyrdom it broke his heart, and he
      died.
    </p>
    <p>
      The mother was granted a pension by the city of Orleans, and upon this she
      lived out her days, which were many. Twenty-four years after her
      illustrious child’s death she traveled all the way to Paris in the
      winter-time and was present at the opening of the discussion in the
      Cathedral of Notre Dame which was the first step in the Rehabilitation.
      Paris was crowded with people, from all about France, who came to get
      sight of the venerable dame, and it was a touching spectacle when she
      moved through these reverent wet-eyed multitudes on her way to the grand
      honors awaiting her at the cathedral. With her were Jean and Pierre, no
      longer the light-hearted youths who marched with us from Vaucouleurs, but
      war-torn veterans with hair beginning to show frost.
    </p>
    <p>
      After the martyrdom Noel and I went back to Domremy, but presently when
      the Constable Richemont superseded La Tremouille as the King’s chief
      adviser and began the completion of Joan’s great work, we put on our
      harness and returned to the field and fought for the King all through the
      wars and skirmishes until France was freed of the English. It was what
      Joan would have desired of us; and, dead or alive, her desire was law for
      us. All the survivors of the personal staff were faithful to her memory
      and fought for the King to the end. Mainly we were well scattered, but
      when Paris fell we happened to be together. It was a great day and a
      joyous; but it was a sad one at the same time, because Joan was not there
      to march into the captured capital with us.
    </p>
    <p>
      Noel and I remained always together, and I was by his side when death
      claimed him. It was in the last great battle of the war. In that battle
      fell also Joan’s sturdy old enemy Talbot. He was eighty-five years old,
      and had spent his whole life in battle. A fine old lion he was, with his
      flowing white mane and his tameless spirit; yes, and his indestructible
      energy as well; for he fought as knightly and vigorous a fight that day as
      the best man there.
    </p>
    <p>
      La Hire survived the martyrdom thirteen years; and always fighting, of
      course, for that was all he enjoyed in life. I did not see him in all that
      time, for we were far apart, but one was always hearing of him.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Bastard of Orleans and D’Alencon and D’Aulon lived to see France free,
      and to testify with Jean and Pierre d’Arc and Pasquerel and me at the
      Rehabilitation. But they are all at rest now, these many years. I alone am
      left of those who fought at the side of Joan of Arc in the great wars.
    </p>
    <p>
      She said I would live until those wars were forgotten—a prophecy
      which failed. If I should live a thousand years it would still fail. For
      whatsoever had touch with Joan of Arc, that thing is immortal.
    </p>
    <p>
      Members of Joan’s family married, and they have left descendants. Their
      descendants are of the nobility, but their family name and blood bring
      them honors which no other nobles receive or may hope for. You have seen
      how everybody along the way uncovered when those children came yesterday
      to pay their duty to me. It was not because they are noble, it is because
      they are grandchildren of the brothers of Joan of Arc.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now as to the Rehabilitation. Joan crowned the King at Rheims. For reward
      he allowed her to be hunted to her death without making one effort to save
      her. During the next twenty-three years he remained indifferent to her
      memory; indifferent to the fact that her good name was under a damning
      blot put there by the priest because of the deeds which she had done in
      saving him and his scepter; indifferent to the fact that France was
      ashamed, and longed to have the Deliverer’s fair fame restored.
      Indifferent all that time. Then he suddenly changed and was anxious to
      have justice for poor Joan himself. Why? Had he become grateful at last?
      Had remorse attacked his hard heart? No, he had a better reason—a
      better one for his sort of man. This better reason was that, now that the
      English had been finally expelled from the country, they were beginning to
      call attention to the fact that this King had gotten his crown by the
      hands of a person proven by the priests to have been in league with Satan
      and burned for it by them as a sorceress—therefore, of what value or
      authority was such a Kingship as that? Of no value at all; no nation could
      afford to allow such a king to remain on the throne.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was high time to stir now, and the King did it. That is how Charles
      VII. came to be smitten with anxiety to have justice done the memory of
      his benefactress.
    </p>
    <p>
      He appealed to the Pope, and the Pope appointed a great commission of
      churchmen to examine into the facts of Joan’s life and award judgment. The
      Commission sat at Paris, at Domremy, at Rouen, at Orleans, and at several
      other places, and continued its work during several months. It examined
      the records of Joan’s trials, it examined the Bastard of Orleans, and the
      Duke d’Alencon, and D’Aulon, and Pasquerel, and Courcelles, and Isambard
      de la Pierre, and Manchon, and me, and many others whose names I have made
      familiar to you; also they examined more than a hundred witnesses whose
      names are less familiar to you—the friends of Joan in Domremy,
      Vaucouleurs, Orleans, and other places, and a number of judges and other
      people who had assisted at the Rouen trials, the abjuration, and the
      martyrdom. And out of this exhaustive examination Joan’s character and
      history came spotless and perfect, and this verdict was placed upon
      record, to remain forever.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was present upon most of these occasions, and saw again many faces which
      I have not seen for a quarter of a century; among them some well-beloved
      faces—those of our generals and that of Catherine Boucher (married,
      alas!), and also among them certain other faces that filled me with
      bitterness—those of Beaupere and Courcelles and a number of their
      fellow-fiends. I saw Haumette and Little Mengette—edging along
      toward fifty now, and mothers of many children. I saw Noel’s father, and
      the parents of the Paladin and the Sunflower.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was beautiful to hear the Duke d’Alencon praise Joan’s splendid
      capacities as a general, and to hear the Bastard indorse these praises
      with his eloquent tongue and then go on and tell how sweet and good Joan
      was, and how full of pluck and fire and impetuosity, and mischief, and
      mirthfulness, and tenderness, and compassion, and everything that was pure
      and fine and noble and lovely. He made her live again before me, and wrung
      my heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have finished my story of Joan of Arc, that wonderful child, that
      sublime personality, that spirit which in one regard has had no peer and
      will have none—this: its purity from all alloy of self-seeking,
      self-interest, personal ambition. In it no trace of these motives can be
      found, search as you may, and this cannot be said of any other person
      whose name appears in profane history.
    </p>
    <p>
      With Joan of Arc love of country was more than a sentiment—it was a
      passion. She was the Genius of Patriotism—she was Patriotism
      embodied, concreted, made flesh, and palpable to the touch and visible to
      the eye.
    </p>
    <p>
      Love, Mercy, Charity, Fortitude, War, Peace, Poetry, Music—these may
      be symbolized as any shall prefer: by figures of either sex and of any
      age; but a slender girl in her first young bloom, with the martyr’s crown
      upon her head, and in her hand the sword that severed her country’s bonds—shall
      not this, and no other, stand for PATRIOTISM through all the ages until
      time shall end?
    </p>
